

Trading on mean-reversion in energy futures markets
## Thorben Lubnau
a
## , Neda Todorova
b,
## ⁎
a
Department of Business Administration European University Viadrina Große Scharrnstraße 59, 15230 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany
b
Griffith Business School, Griffith University 170 Kessels Road, Nathan, Queensland 4111, Australia
abstractarticle  info
Article history:
## Received 21 July 2014
Received in revised form 21 June 2015
## Accepted 30 June 2015
Available online 29 July 2015
JEL classification:
## C30
## G12
## G14
## Keywords:
Technical trading
## Bollinger Bands
Energy futures
Market efficiency
We study whether simple technical trading strategies enjoying large popularity among practitioners can be
employed profitably in the context of hedge portfolios for Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Gasoline and Heating Oil fu-
tures. The strategies tested are based on mean-reverting calendar spread portfolios established with dynamic
hedge ratios. Entry and exit signals are generated by so-called Bollinger Bands. The trading system is applied to
twenty-two years of historical data from 1992 to 2013 for various specifications, taking transaction costs into ac-
count. The significance of the results is evaluated with a bootstrap test in which randomly generated orders are
compared to orders placed by the trading system. Whereas wefind most combinations involving the front-
month and second-month futures to be significantly profitable for all commodities tested, the best results for
the risk-adjusted Sharpe Ratio are obtained for WTI Crude Oil and Natural Gas, with Sharpe Ratios in excess of
2 for most combinations and a rather smooth performance for all calendar spreads. Based on our results, there
is a serious doubt whether energy futures markets can be considered weakly efficient in the short-term.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
## 1. Introduction
Over the past decade, energy commodity prices have exhibited dra-
matic rises and falls to an extent not observed since the energy crisis of
the 1970s (Koch, 2014). At the same time, energy futures have experi-
enced an impressive increase infinancial investor demand after the
US futures markets have been transformed radically due to the US
Commodity Futures Modernization Act in 2000 which introduced
moreflexibility, allowingfinancial agents such as commodity index
funds toenter them.Onthe onehand, energycommodities are regarded
as low-cost diversification instruments that widen the opportunity set
for portfolio optimization (Engelen and Kaiser, 2008). Furthermore,
markets with a high liquidity attract short-term investors who intend
to go long or short the asset for only a few days or even on an intraday
basis. These developments have triggered a controversial discussion in
literature aiming to establish whether supply and demand fundamen-
tals or speculative trading effects prevail in the price building process
of energy futures contracts (e.g.Chevallier, 2013; Sanders et al., 2004).
Given the ever increasing interest in these markets, a question of tre-
mendous relevance for academic research and practitioners related to
the price building processes in energy futures markets is whether his-
torical price patterns can be exploited by savvy investors. This study
examines whether there could be profitable trading opportunities in
four very popular energy futures markets by using simple trading rules.
Due to the increased investment interest in commodity markets and
related products and the wide availability of investment instruments
(e.g. futures, CFDs, various certificates), the efficiency of energy markets
and especially the crude oil market has already been addressed in aca-
demic literature.Shambora and Rossiter (2007)use an artificial neural
network model with moving average crossover inputs to predict crude
oil futures prices and document significant profitability which is at
odds with the expectation of an efficient oil futures market.Tabak and
Cajueiro (2007)analyze the efficiency of Brentand West Texas Interme-
diate (WTI) Crude Oil using rescaled range Hurst analysis andfind evi-
dence that the oil market has become more efficient over time.
Alvarez-Ramirez et al. (2008)analyze the autocorrelations of the inter-
national crude oil price process by the means of detrendedfluctuation
analysis and document that over long horizons the crude oil market is
consistent with the efficient market hypothesis byFama (1970)but
cannot exclude the possibility of market inefficiencies at short time ho-
rizons.Alvarez-Ramirez et al. (2010)continue this analysis using lagged
detrendedfluctuation analysis and confirm that deviations from effi-
ciency are dependent of the forecasting horizon.Wang and Liu (2010)
test for the efficiency of the WTI Crude Oil market by studying the dy-
namics of local Hurst exponents and show that crude oil prices are be-
coming more efficient over time for all considered time horizons.Lean
et al. (2010)study WTI Crude Oil spot and futures prices using mean-
variance and stochastic dominance approaches andfind that there are
## Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319
⁎Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 7 3735 7219; fax: +61 7 3735 3719
E-mail addresses:lubnau@europa-uni.de(T. Lubnau),n.todorova@griffith.edu.au
(N. Todorova).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2015.06.018
0140-9883/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
## Energy Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eneco

no arbitrage opportunities between spot and futures prices. Focusing on
the high-frequency dynamics of futures price data of Crude Oil, Heating
Oil, Gasoline, and Natural Gas,Wang and Yang (2010)identify market
inefficiencies, especially for Heating Oil and Natural Gas mostly during
periods of bullish markets.
Our work is primarily motivated by the divergentfindings in the lit-
erature regarding market efficiency and technical trading in commodity
markets as well asthe lack of studies onthe performanceof theso called
Bollinger Bands, a well-known tool to technical analysts which has been
regarded in academic literature to only rather limited extent. The dis-
cussion among academics and practitioners about the merits of techni-
cal analysis has been ongoing for decades. Technical trading systems are
discussed in a number of research studies likeBessembinder and Chan
(1998),Brock et al. (1992),Levich and Thomas (1993)orKwon and
Kish (2002). The comprehensive survey byPark and Irwin (2007)
shows that the main focus of attention of academic research is on equity
and foreign exchange markets, not on commodities. The profitability of
technical trading rules for commodity markets has been addressed by a
few studies, mainly related to momentum and simple moving average
rules.Miffre and Rallis (2007)apply contrarian and momentum strate-
gies to US commodity futures contracts. While contrarian strategies are
found to perform poorly, momentum strategies appear to be profitable
over time periods of up to 12 months.Shen et al. (2007)compare the
performance of momentum strategies for commodity and equity mar-
kets and document highly significantmomentum profits for holdingpe-
riods up to 9 months with magnitudes comparable to those realized
with equity trading. Contrary to the studies claiming that technical
strategies in commodity futures earn profitsthat cannot beconsiderably
weakened by the relatively low transactions costs prevailing in these
markets,Marshall et al. (2008)apply a large set of technical trading
rules to 15 major commodity futures series, andfind that the resulting
profits cannot consistently exceed those expected to emerge due to ran-
dom variation. More recently,Fuertes et al. (2010)examine combina-
tions of momentum and term structure trading signals in commodity
futures markets andfind momentum and term structure strategies to
be profitable when implemented individually whileSzakmary et al.
(2010)document pure trend-following strategies generally to outper-
form momentum strategies.
## 1
Apart from the controversy about the profitability of technical trad-
ing rules in commodity markets, none of these studies apply Bollinger
Bands which are an easy to implement tool for technical analysis.
Despite the fact that these trading rules enjoy extensive popularity
among practitioners, the academic literature investigating their perfor-
mance is rather limited. Moreover, these studies cast doubts on the
profitability of the Bollinger Bands. Using data of equity indices and
the forex market,Lento et al. (2007)establish that the Bollinger Bands
are consistently unable to earn profits in excess of the buy-and-hold
trading strategy.Leung and Chong (2003)compare the profitability of
Moving Average Envelopes and Bollinger Bands for a broad sample of
equity market indices andfind that Bollinger Bands underperform the
Moving Average Envelopes. Studies related to this paper areGirma
and Paulson (1998)andGirma and Paulson (1999)who, even though
not explicitly acknowledging that their trading rules are similar to the
Bollinger Bands, investigate whether the mean-reverting property of
petroleum futures crack spreads can be economically exploited for
generating excess returns. Unlike our approach, these authors use
predetermined portfolio weights. Their simulations indicate that spread
seasonalities may be used for generating profitable trading strategies
but do not lead to consistently significant results.
Given the recent empirical evidence that Bollinger Bands are not as
effective as other technical indicators, this paper extends the existing
literature on technical trading by implementing these rather simple
trading rules for trading hedge portfolios consisting of futures on the
same underlying asset but of different maturities for major energy
futures markets. The study focuses on four NYMEX contracts (WTI
Crude Oil, Heating Oil, Gasoline and Natural Gas).
## 2
The individual fu-
tures are selected as they are primary instruments used for hedging
and are among the most heavily traded commodity derivatives con-
tracts. Moreover, the course of the NYMEX Crude Oil futures prices is
closely monitored by regulators and policy makers. For example, the
European Central Bank employs oil futures prices in constructing the in-
flation and output-gap forecasts that guide monetary policyAlquist and
Kilian (2010). The considered four futures are important constituents of
leading commodity futures indexes, adding up to 38.5% of the S&P GSCI
and 25.27% of the DJ-UBSCI.
## 3
The tested mean-reversion strategies involve calendar spreads con-
structed with these futures and complement existing literature on spread
trading in energy markets (e.g.Girma and Paulson, 1998, 1999; Dunis
et al., 2006, 2008).Butterworth and Holmes (2002)state that“an analysis
of spread trading is important since it contributes to the economics of ar-
bitrage and serves as an alternative to cash-futures arbitrage for testing
for futures market efficiency”. Moreover, spreads are particularly interest-
ing because they are less likely to suffer from information shocks, as the
movements of the two legs often offset each other (Dunis et al., 2006).
More specifically, similarly toCummins and Bucca (2012)andBarett
and Kolb (1995), we consider futures contracts on the same asset but of
different maturities and extend extant literature by establishing dynamic
hedge ratios with Kalmanfilter techniques. Using daily data from 1992 to
2013, wefind most combinations involving the front-month and second-
month futures to be significantly profitable for all futures under consider-
ation. The best risk-adjusted results are documented for WTI Crude Oil
and Natural Gas, with Sharpe Ratios in excess of 2 for most combinations
and a rather even performance for all tested combinations. Our results
support extant studies (Alvarez-Ramirez et al., 2008, 2010; Shambora
and Rossiter, 2007) which cannot rule out the possibility of short-term
market inefficiencies.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.Section 2gives
an overview of the data used in the testing of the trading strategies.
The methodology of the utilized trading strategies and significance
tests is presented inSection 3. Theresults of the back tests are presented
inSection 4and thefinal Section concludes.
## 2. Data
Data used in this article are obtained from Datastream. Our sample
includes settlement prices for the futures of the nearestfive months
for WTI Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Heating Oil and Gasoline (RBOB,
Reformulated gasoline Blendstock for Oxygenate Blending). All futures in
our sample are traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange. According
to the data provider, the futures price series are constructed by rolling
over on thefirst trading day of the month. The daily settlement prices
for the considered energy futures are also available for Trading at Settle-
ment (orders for trade at settlement products are executed at the cur-
rent day's settlement price). The futures contracts are traded almost
around the clock at the CME (at both Globex and ClearPort electronic
platforms) so that the trading strategies are viable in real-life terms.
Table 1 contains further detailed information on the employed futures
contracts. Summary statistics for the daily futures prices from January
1991 to December 2013 are reported in Table 2. Data for Gasoline is
only available since October 2005. The choice of 1991 as the beginning
of our sample period is based on the attempt to use sample periods of
unified length for all assets under consideration (which is not possible
for Gasoline futures only).
## 1
Trading commodities is treated in numerous introductory books on technical analysis
as well, for exampleStridsman (2001)andChan (2013).
## 2
Earlier versions of this paper included additionally futures contracts on Brent Crude
Oil traded on the ICE. The trading strategies utilizing Brent futures were found to perform
very similarly to WTI. The corresponding results are omitted for the sake of brevity.
## 3
Target index weights for 2014. Sources: press.djindexes.com and spindices.com.
313T. Lubnau, N. Todorova / Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319

To give the reader a feeling of the magnitude of the results obtained
by trading on mean reversion, Table 2 also reports averagefive-year an-
nualized mean returns and standard deviations as well as Sharpe ratios
of a naive buy-and-hold strategy for all futures contracts under consid-
eration. The buy-and-hold strategies are evaluated assuming the same
transaction cost rate on the roll-over days as the discussed strategies
(for more details, please see below).
## 3. Methodology
3.1. Mean-reversion trading rules
The trading rules considered are based on mean-reversion charac-
teristics of price time series. A short term investor would be rather
happy tofind a time series that exhibits this kind of behavior as it trans-
lates to a simple set of trading rules, namely go long (short) whenever
the price is considerably below (above) the mean and exit the position
when the price is back at the mean. Unfortunately, it is hard tofind sin-
gle assets that mean-revert. Therefore, a mean-reverting strategy is not
appropriate for trading futures individually. However, an investor is not
confined to single price series but can set up a portfolio of assets which
may lead to a stationary market value of the portfolio. In other words, if
the price series of two futures are cointegrated, then there exists a linear
combination of both series that is stationary.
A setup for the mean-reverting trading strategy is provided by the
so-called Bollinger Bands, as described for example inChan (2013).
The indicatorzat timet,
z
t
## ¼
p
t
## −MA
t
σ
t
ð1Þ
is made up of the value of the hedge portfoliop, a simple moving aver-
age of a given length ofp, and the rolling standard deviation ofpwith
the same length as the moving average. Although the classical Bollinger
Band uses the moving average length of 20, we test moving averages
and rolling standard deviations of length 50, 100 and 200 as well.
Entry signals for long and short positions in the portfolio are gener-
ated whenever the indicator reaches certain extreme values, namely
−2 and 2 on the lower and upper side.
## 4
Entry signals for long positions
in the hedge portfolio are triggered whenever thez-score reaches values
below−2, entry signals for short positions on the other hand are gen-
erated as soon as thez-score is above 2.Fig. 2(discussed in detail in
Section Results) provides an example of the movement of thez-score.
This rule translates to a deviation of the current portfolio value of
more than two standard deviations away from the moving average.
The simple moving average is used to allow for changes in the portfolio
value level over time, in other words a change in the calendar spread of
the futures curve. A few more words on the actual trades may be in
order here as it must be stressed that a hedge portfolio is traded.
Being long the hedge portfolio involves of course a longandashort
position of the two futures forming the calendar spread. Using the ex-
ample of a long hedge portfolio this translates to being long the respec-
tive front-month futures in our setup and being short the respective
longer-term futures.
An exit value has to be provided as well, values ofz= 0 andz=0.2
are used. Here, the indicatorz= 0 means that the long or short position
is closed whenever the portfolio value reaches the moving average
again. The second combination,z= 0.2, is implemented because often
price movements will not stop at the moving average but tend to over-
shoot this mark.
## 5
To profit from this overshooting, an investor should
close the long or short position when the price has crossed the moving
average and moved a little bit further. In case the mean-reversion trad-
ing system is in the market at the end of the sample period, the position
is closed using the last available closing price. For backtesting we as-
sume that an investor starts with $100. Whenever the system signals
an entry he goes either long or short one unit of the portfolio, that
means he is either long the shorter-term futures contract and short
the longer-term futures contract or the other way round.
The trading rules described tend to stay only a fraction of the avail-
able time in the market. For simplicity, we assume that an investor
does not earn any interest during times he is not invested. In other
words, the money market rate isr
f
## =0.
3.2. The hedge portfolio
What remains is to specify the hedge ratio of the involved pair of fu-
tures. If we denote the prices of the futuresAandBon one and the same
underlying asset but of different maturities involved in the hedge port-
folio asp
## A
andp
## B
, and their quantities in the portfolioQ
## A
andQ
## B
## ,taking
p
## H
to be the value of the hedge portfolio leads to
p
## H
## ¼Q
## A
## p
## A
## −Q
## B
## p
## B
:ð2Þ
The change of the portfolio value is therefore
## Δp
## H
## ¼Q
## A
Δp
## A
## −Q
## B
Δp
## B
:ð3Þ
Since the intention of building a hedge portfolio is to achieveΔp
## H
## =0,
the hedge ratiohis given by
h¼
## Q
## B
## Q
## A
## ¼
## Δp
## A
## Δp
## B
:ð4Þ
As argued inHatemi-J and Roca (2006), while the hedge ratio can be
represented as the coefficient in a regression, having time varying in-
stead of static coefficients is appropriate if the value of the hedged port-
folio should be kept relatively stable. The introduction of a time varying
hedge ratio can be justified because of changes in certain non-
observable factors. In the energy futures markets, investor sentiment
and expectations change rather frequently and fast due to new informa-
tion. For example, WTI's price reactions depend to a large extent on US
specific factors like crude production and inventories of crude and
distillates.
To account for changes in the hedge ratio, a dynamic linear model in
state space form is used with a Kalman Filter to update the estimated
ratio according to the arrival of new data over time. The Kalman Filter
has its roots in engineering applications but is widely used in thefield
offinance nowadays and is no stranger to hedging applications (see
for exampleSchwartz, 1997; Lautier and Galli, 2004). However, most
studies do not address hedges of two different futures but rather
hedging a spot instrument with its futures (e.g.Hatemi-J and Roca,
## 2014).
When using a linear regression setting, the lookback period is spec-
ified and the data sampled in this lookback period is used to get the best
estimate of thehedgeratio overthe whole sample period. This approach
gives rise to a number of problems. First, the lookback period is set arbi-
trarily. Another critical point is that as the lookback period shifts for-
ward, certain observations are dropped from the calculation while
new observations are added. This can lead to abrupt changes in the
hedge ratio. One way to cope with this problem is to use exponential
weighting to preserve the impact of older observations. Another is to
set up a state space model and use the Kalman Filter which, in its sim-
plest form, is a linear algorithm that updates the forecast of an unob-
servable variable, the hedge ratio, with every new information coming
in. Although the trading system uses daily closing prices and therefore
rather low frequent data, an investor is interested in updating the
input parameters as fast as possible. The Kalman Filter is a very fast
## 4
We have chosen these values in compliance with investors' common practices and ac-
ademic studies on the performance of Bollinger Bands (Lento et al., 2007; Leung and
## Chong, 2003).
## 5
To be precise: The exitz-scorefor the longposition is0.2, the one forthe short position
## −0.2.
314T. Lubnau, N. Todorova / Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319

means to achieve this goal as pointed out byLautier and Galli (2004)
and allows to update the forecast of the hedge ratio very quickly. The
state space model used in this study is a dynamic linear model (DLM),
that is, as the name already tells, linear and Gaussian.
To avoid the pitfall of hindsight bias in parameter estimation, the
Kalman Filter is not set up once for the whole sample period, as this
would include observations an investor does not know yet. Thefilter
is recalculated every trading day when new futures prices become
available.
## 6
Moreover, we use hedge ratio predictions generated with
the Kalman Filter, that means that the current day's data is used to pre-
dict the hedge ratio used on the following day. Thus, the timing of the
data availability is not an issue for the viability of the trading strategy
in real-life terms. The dynamic linear model presented here is similar
to the linear regression but allows for time-varying coefficients. The
specification of the model reads
p
## A;t
## ¼β
## 1;t
þβ
## 2;t
p
## B;t
þε
t
## ;ε
t
N0;σ
## 2
## 
## :
ð5Þ
The daily forecast of thehedgeratio,β
## 2,t
, is used tocalculatethe mar-
ket value of the hedge portfolios. The dynamic linear model (DLM) used
for the trading strategy in general can be described in two equations,
namely the observation equation and the state equation,
p
## A;t
## ¼x
## 0
t
θ
t
þv
t
## ;v
t
N0;σ
## 2
t
## 
ð6Þ
θ
t
## ¼G
t
θ
t−1
þw
t
## ;w
t
## N0;W
t
ðÞ;ð7Þ
wherex
t
## ′
## =[1,p
t,B
] is the vector of explanatory variables with a constant
term and the price of futuresB.G
t
is called the evolution matrix and, fol-
lowing the default setting ofPetris et al. (2009), is an identity matrix
here. The unobservable variablesθ
t
## =[β
## 1,t
## ,β
## 2,t
] are the intercept and
the hedge ratio. MatrixWmodels the variances in the state equation
and is usually diagonal which translates to independent random walks
for the regression coefficients. The Kalman Filter is the method of choice
to recursively update the parameter estimates whenever new informa-
tion arrives. A prior view on the distribution of the parameters,
θ
## 0
~N(m
## 0
## ,C
## 0
) is specified, although we assume a low level of confidence
in this view. Therefore, thefiltering process is started withm
## 0
= 1.0 and
## C
## 0
## =1e
## 7
, the default value of the dlm-package in the R software suite.
Following the description given inPetris et al. (2009), the Kalman
Filtering for the dynamic linear model specified in Eqs.(6) and (7)pro-
ceeds as follows. Using the data available up to timet-1, the parameter
estimate att-1 is
θ
t−1
jp
## A;1:t−1
Nm
t−1
## ;C
t−1
ðÞ;ð8Þ
and we move ahead to predict the Gaussian distributions ofθ
t
andp
## A,t
with parameters
a
t
¼Eθ
t
jp
## A;1:t−1
## 
## ¼G
t
m
t−1
;ð9Þ
## R
t
¼Varθ
t
jp
## A;1:t−1
## 
## ¼G
t
## C
t−1
## G
## 0
t
þW
t
;ð10Þ
f
t
¼Ep
## A;t
jp
## A;1:t−1
## 
## ¼x
t
a
t
;ð11Þ
## Q
t
¼Var p
## A;t
jp
## A;1:t−1
## 
## ¼x
t
## R
t
x
## 0
t
þV
t
:ð12Þ
The updates for thefiltering distribution after the arrival of new
price information and with a forecast error ofe
t
## =p
## A,t
## −f
t
are
m
t
¼Eθ
t
jp
## A;1:t
## 
## ¼a
t
þR
t
x
## 0
t
## Q
## −1
t
e
t
ð13Þ
## C
t
¼Varθ
t
jp
## A;1:t
## 
## ¼R
t
## −R
t
x
## 0
t
## Q
## −1
t
x
t
## R
t
:ð14Þ
To start thefiltering process, it is necessary to specify the variance
terms inV
t
andW
t
. Our approach is to derive estimates of the unknown
variancetermsbyusinga Maximum-LikelihoodEstimation (MLE). With
a vector of unknown parametersΦrepresenting the variances in the
state equation, the loglikelihoodLis
LΦðÞ¼−
## 1
## 2
## X
n
t¼1
logQ
t
jj
## −
## 1
## 2
## X
n
t¼1
p
## W;t
## −f
t
## 
## 0
## Q
## −1
t
p
## W;t
## −f
t
## 
ð15Þ
and is numerically optimized to get the Maximum Likelihood Estima-
tion (MLE). The parameters from the MLE are then plugged into
Eqs.(6) and (7)and the Kalman Filtering process is run to calculate
the dynamic hedge ratio. The MLE is re-run every trading day as soon
as new data becomes available.
3.3. Testing the significance
Based on the approaches discussed inLo et al. (2000),toassessthe
significance of the results of the trading simulations sets of simulated
trades are generated. The simulated trades are constrained in so far as
the number of long and short trades has to be equal to the number of
long and short trades in the original back test and they should have
the same mean holding time, that means the average period of time
until the position is closed, as the original trades. For each test period,
the number of long and short entries and the average holding period
is recorded. Then, random entries on the long and short side are gener-
ated and the positions are closed after the passing of the average hold-
ing period. The profit and loss and the daily returns and their standard
deviations are recorded and compared to those of the strategies tested.
This procedure is repeated 1000 times. The number of simulated runs
that perform better than the tested strategy is used to calculate an
achieved significance level or simulatedp-value. This procedure follows
the idea of the computer-based bootstrap methodology outlined in
Efron and Tibshirani (1986)andEfron and Tibshirani (1993). Assume,
for example, that out of 1000 bootstrap runs 15 show a profit in excess
of the original back test. This yields an achieved significance level or
simulatedp-value of 0.015 or 1.5%.
In the words ofShleifer (2000)“showing that a particular strategy
based on exploiting stale information on average earns a positive cash
flow over some period of time is not, therefore, by itself evidence of
market inefficiency. To earn this profit, an investor may have to bear
risk and his profit may just be a fair market compensation for risk-
bearing.”Whenever the performance of technical trading systems is
assessed, it is of utmost importance to consider the investor's risk expo-
sure. We calculate the Sharpe ratio by adjusting the mean daily returns
of the strategy with the standard deviation as we assume a risk-free rate
of 0.0 and annualize this number.
## 7
This statistic is calculated for each
bootstrap sample, too, and used to arrive at a simulatedp-value.
Although speculative investors in the energy futures markets are ex-
pected to act rather short-term, this only means that they are frequently
entering and existing positions. However, trading systems like the ones
described here should be evaluated given their long-run performance.
Therefore, rollingfive year periods are used to test the profitability of
the technical rules. This is in line with investment practice as an investor
should not abandon a strategy just because it produced some losing
trades at the start. The strategy should rather be able to produce more
profits than losses and profits should rather come constantly from
trades than just depending on one lucky punch. Winning trades with
## 6
Given the data processing capabilities, even a private investor usually has at hand, it
does not take more than a few seconds to update the hedge ratio. Software for
implementing the Kalman Filter is freely available, like the dlm-package in the R statistical
software suite, seePetris et al. (2009).
## 7
The Sharpe Ratio is commonly used in investment practice. It is, however, not just an
ad-hoc rule of thumb, but is closely related to quadratic utility which is often used to mod-
el risk-averse investors:“There is a one-to-one relationship between the maximum qua-
dratic utility attainable in a market and the market Sharpe Ratio”Černý (2009).
315T. Lubnau, N. Todorova / Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319

positive difference between entry and exit are therefore reported to
allow the reader to assess this characteristic of the strategies.
3.4. Transaction costs
Locke and Venkatesh (1997)estimate futures markets transaction
costs to be in the 0.0004–0.033% range. To account for costs of entering
and exiting futures positions, transaction fees of 0.1% of the respective
futures price are assumed for each trade. As an investor is trading a cal-
ender spread, one round-turn transaction consists of four trades, for ex-
ample entering long futuresAand short futuresBand then closing both
positions. The transaction costs used are higher than the numbers given
for example byDunis et al. (2006)andDunis et al. (2008), however the
strategy may make it necessary to roll over to the next futures contract
or to make adjustments due to changes in the hedge ratio. Therefore,
working with a kind of additional safety margin in the costs reflects
these problems.
## 4. Results
The results of the backtests of the strategies are reported in Tables 3
to 6 andFig. 1. We test the front-month futures against the two, three,
four andfive month futures for each commodity for rollingfive-year pe-
riods. The results given are averages of allfive-year periods starting
from 1992.
## 8
The price series from 1991 are used to establish initial
Kalmanfilter parameter estimates. Thefirst two columns in the tables
describe the strategy used, that is the length of the moving average
and theexit score used. We then report theprofitorlossofthestrategy
## 9
## ,
the number of trades and the number of winning trades. A trade is con-
sidered to be a winningtradewhenever thereis a positive difference be-
tween the entry and exit of the position. Columns 6 and 7 show the
mean holding period for one trade and the time in market as a percent-
age of the total sample period. The last three columns report the daily
meanreturnwith transaction costs taken into account, the dailyreturns'
standard deviation and the Sharpe ratio. As we set the risk free interest
rate to zero, it should be noted that an investor following the proposed
Bollinger Band strategy does not earn any interest when he is not in the
market.
It must be stressed that the Bollinger Bands system in the context of
our study is aimed at detecting extreme deviations of the value of a
hedge portfolio from its mean, where we define“extreme”to be two
standard deviations from the mean. Therefore, the occurrence of an
entry signal should be a rare event, and obviously this is indeed the
case, as the number of trades ranges fromfive to 70 on average over a
five year horizon. The 20 days moving average rules generate the
most signals and have the shortest holding periods per trade. The num-
ber of trades becomes lower for longer moving averages, whereas the
holding period per trade becomes longer. For all futures tested, the
employed strategies generate standard deviations of daily returns that
are in general higher than those of randomly placed orders. This does
not come as a surprise as we are targeting exactly those periods that
are marked by extreme deviations from the mean and this by itself
indicates that we enter the market when it is very volatile. As the
setup of the trading strategies assumes a return to an average level,
we expect high levels of volatility to persist as long as the position is
held. However, in many cases, the subsequent returns are more than
enough to compensate an investor for the additional risk as can be
seen by the Sharpe ratios reported.
Given the overall results of the rules tested, WTI and Natural Gas
show a comparatively stronger performance than Heating Oil and
Gasoline. As these are the two most prominent commodities, this is
rather surprising as one would expect trading strategies such as ours
to work better in smaller markets. Another aspect is highlighted by
the profit migration plots shown inFig. 1. WTI's and Heating Oil's profit
peak around 2005, whereas the highest profits for Natural Gas are
recorded in thefirst half of the 1990s with another rise in the mid-
2000s. The time series for Gasoline is way shorter and therefore defies
interpretation.
Inspecting the individual commodities, wefind all combinations for
WTI to yield significant results at the 1%-level for all calendar spreads
tested no matter whether profit, mean returns or Sharpe Ratios are con-
sidered. Moreover, there is no combination that produces a loss in the
sample of 5-year periods. The standard deviations recorded for the
strategies seem to be higher in general than those of randomly placed
orders, as is indicated for example by the simulated p-value ranges
from 0.08 to 0.34 for WTI. However, given these numbers it is not pos-
sible to establish that the standard deviation is significantly higher for
the trading strategies for commonly used significance levels like 5%.
The strategies do not only produce rather high Sharpe Ratios, but we
alsofind that almost every single trade entered is profitable as can be
seen by comparing the Trades and Win columns. Having exposure dur-
ing20% to40% of thetotal time only, themeanholdingperiods forsingle
trades ranges from just over 5 days to about 21 days.
The performance of the trading strategy for Natural Gas does very
much mimic the one of WTI. For most combinations, the risk-adjusted
Sharpe Ratios are above 2, with 1.69 being the lowest recorded. In
terms of profit (PNL), wefind Natural Gas to be even stronger than
WTI, whereas the holding periods are shorter than for crude with just
2 to 11 days and time in market from 7% to 27%. Again, the standard de-
viation of returns for the strategies are usually higher than those of the
random trades, but without significance at the 5%-level.
For both WTI and Natural Gas, we record a very steady performance
for the 2-, 3-, 4- and 5-month futures combined with the front-month
futures. There is no significant deterioration or improvement in the
risk-adjusted Sharpe Ratio. Strategies based on Gasoline futures, on
the other hand, exhibit deterioration when using more distant futures
contracts. Even though all rules yield positive profits, we cannot estab-
lish that these results are significant when using commonly applied sig-
nificance levels. Heating Oil is the weakest performer in our sample.
Nevertheless, we document Sharpe ratios significantly higher than
those of randomly placed orders for the front- and second-month fu-
tures and Moving Average periods of 20 and 50 days as well as front-
and third-month futures and MA equal to 20 days. Interestingly, the
less profitable combinations often involve being in the market more
than 50% of the total time.
Additionally, pairwise comparison with the results reported for the
naive buy-and-hold strategies (Table 2) shows that the presented
hedge strategies outperform considerably long-only strategies. Further-
more, it should be noted that given the strong movements that charac-
terize for example the crude oil market, long-only strategies are very
speculative in nature and can lead to severe losses in down-trending
markets like the one witnessed since June 2014 while the strategies
tested here use hedged positions and just try to exploit short-term im-
balances between two contracts.
To show whether theprofitability comes from buyingfrontcontracts
and selling back contracts or the other way around as well as if the
trades depend on whether the market was in backwardation or
contango,Fig. 2presents the dailyz-scores calculated for WTI front-
month and second-month futures with a Moving Average and rolling
standard deviation of 200 days for thefive year period 2009–2013.
However, the following holds true for all combinations. The solid red
lines indicate the entry scores of 2 and−2, the dashed red lines are
the exit scores of 0.2 and−0.2. We followMiffre and Rallis (2007)
and establish the periods of contango and backwardation by calculating
the so called roll-return as follows:R
t
## ¼
FðfrontfuturesÞ
t
FðdistantfuturesÞ
t
−1. A positive
## 8
The results for the individualfive-year periods are not reported for the sake of brevity
but are available upon request.
## 9
Note that the profit reported is per quoted unit, not per contract. So, for example, the
profit for WTI should be multiplied by 1,000 to arrive at the profit for a trade with real-
world contracts.
316T. Lubnau, N. Todorova / Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319

roll-return indicates that the market is backwardated and a negative
roll-return suggests that the market is in contango. InFig. 2, gray shaded
areas indicate periods when the market is in backwardation whereas
white areas indicate contango. The variation of thez-scores implies
that thez-scores exceeding 2 and−2 occur without a distinct pattern
in both contango and backwardation periods and cannot be assigned
to a specific market state. Thus, the term structure of commodity futures
prices does not appear to be the driver of the strategies' performance.
Furthermore, a negativez-score below−2 indicates that the strategy
is long in the front-month futures and short in the longer-maturity fu-
tures. Conversely, a positivez-score above 2 indicates that the strategy
is short in the front-month futures and long in the longer-maturity fu-
tures. Thez-scores triggering an entry in the market vary randomly so
that the overall profitability does not emerge from a strategy predomi-
nantly buying front contracts and selling back contracts or the other
way around.
Overall, our study supports the results ofAlvarez-Ramirez et al. (2008,
2010)andShambora and Rossiter (2007). These studies use data sampled
at different frequencies to document that over long horizons the crude oil
market is consistent with the efficientmarkethypothesisbyFama (1970)
butcannotexcludethepossibilityofmarketinefficiencies at short time
horizons. Our results based on a different but simple to implement meth-
odology confirm the existence of economically exploitable short-term in-
efficiencies. Furthermore, while the aforementioned studies do not
consider transaction costs, their main result–there are inefficiencies in
the crude oil market in the short-term–can be confirmed in a real-
world setting using a conservative transaction cost rate. Moreover, this
conclusion is shown to hold not only for the crude oil market, but can
be extended to the case of other popular energy futures markets.
## 5. Conclusion
Commodity markets have undergone significant changes over the
last decades and, especially over the last ten to 15 years, attracted a lot
of investors' attention.What is true for commodities in generalholds es-
pecially for the energy markets. However, energy is far from being just
## (a)
## 1995
## 2000
## 2005
## 2
## 3
## 4
## 5
## 20
## 30
## 40
## 50
## 60
## Year
WTI / month
## Profit
## (b)
## 1995
## 2000
## 2005
## 2
## 3
## 4
## 5
## 20
## 40
## 60
## 80
## 100
## Year
NG / month
## Profit
## (c)
## 1995
## 2000
## 2005
## 2
## 3
## 4
## 5
## 0.0
## 0.2
## 0.4
## 0.6
## 0.8
## Year
HO / month
## Profit
## (d)
## 2006
## 2007
## 2008
## 2009
## 2
## 3
## 4
## 5
## 0.5
## 1.0
## 1.5
## 2.0
## Year
GAS / month
## Profit
Fig. 1.PnL Migration for 20 days Moving Average and 0.0 Exit Score.Note:Thisfigure reports the profit and loss for the individualfive year periods tested. The year-axis specifies the
starting year of the respectivefive year period. The month-axis specifies which contract was added to the front-month contract to set up the hedge portfolio. Panel (a) is WTI, panel
(b) Natural Gas, panel (c) Heating Oil and panel (d) Gasoline.
317T. Lubnau, N. Todorova / Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319

one more asset class among others, as it is the basis upon which modern
societies are built. This makes energy a highly political asset as well, es-
pecially because the largest reserves can be found in the most instable
regions of the world.
Political tensionsin important energy producingcountrieslikeLibya,
Iraq, Iran or Nigeria or unpredictable weather conditions like especially
cold winters have the potential not only to change the price structure of
energy futures in general, but to influence the calendar spreads of the
futures. If, for example, the short term supply of energy is seen as en-
dangered by an especially cold winter, the front month futures may
react way stronger than do the futures with longer time to maturity.
This paper extends the existing literature on technical trading systems
and market efficiency by implementing rather simple trading rules in
the futures markets for major energy commodities: Crude Oil, Gasoline,
Natural Gas and Heating Oil. The Bollinger Band strategies employed in
our study assume that shocks changing these spreads are short-lived
and there is mean reversion in the hedge portfolios we create.
Following the definitionofFama (1970), a market is called efficientif
prices reflect all available information. In a more detailed view on the
information sets used, weak-form efficiency is defined to comprise
only historical data. The results presented in this paper give conclusive
evidence that it is possible to use technical trading systems profitably
in the energy futures market. We focus on the futures market, as our ap-
proach is to test a strategy that could be implemented even by retail in-
vestors by using standardizedfinancial instruments. Our results show
that Sharpe Ratios in excess of 2 are obtained with almost all WTI
Crude Oil and Natural Gas combinations, while significant results for
Gasoline and Heating Oil futures are achieved mainly by using shorter
Moving Average periods and by trading front-month and second- or
third-month futures. A detailed discussion of the results show that
events triggering an entry in the market vary randomly so that theover-
all profitability does not arise from a strategy always buying front con-
tracts and selling back contracts or the other way around. Overall, our
results cast serious doubts that energy futures markets are efficient in
the short-term.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online athttp://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2015.06.018.
## References
Alquist, R., Kilian, L., 2010.What do we learn from the price of crude oil futures? J. Appl.
## Econ. 25, 539–573.
Alvarez-Ramirez, J., Alvarez, J., Rodriguez, E., 2008.Short-term predictability of crude oil
markets: a detrendedfluctuation analysis approach. Energy Econ. 30, 2645–2656.
Alvarez-Ramirez, J., Alvarez, J., Solis, R., 2010.Crude oil market efficiency and modeling:
insights from the multiscaling autocorrelation pattern. Energy Econ. 32, 993–1000.
Barett, W.B., Kolb, R.W., 1995.Analysis of spreads in agricultural futures. J. Futur. Mark. 15,
## 69–86.
Bessembinder, H., Chan, K., 1998.Market efficiency and the returns to technical analysis.
## Financ. Manag. 27, 5–17.
Brock, W., Lakonishok, J., LeBaron, B., 1992.Simple technical trading rules and the sto-
chastic properties of stock returns. J. Financ. 47, 1731–1764.
Butterworth, D., Holmes, P., 2002.Inter-market spread trading: evidence from UK index
futures markets. Appl. Financ. Econ. 12, 783–791.
Černý, A., 2009.Mathematical Techniques in Finance: Tools for Incomplete Markets. 2nd
ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford.
Chan, E., 2013.Algorithmic Trading: Winning Strategies and Their Rationale. Wiley, New
## Jersey.
Chevallier, J., 2013.Price relationships in crude oil futures: new evidence from CFTC
disaggregated data. Environ. Econ. Policy Stud. 15, 133–170.
Cummins, M., Bucca, A., 2012.Quantitative spread trading on crude oil and refined
products markets. Quant. Finan. 12, 1857–1875.
Dunis, C., Laws, J., Evans, B., 2006.Trading futures spreads: an application of correlation
and thresholdfilters. Appl. Financ. Econ. 16, 903–914.
Dunis, C., Laws, J., Evans, B., 2008.Trading futures spread portfolios: applications of higher
order and recurrent networks. Eur. J. Financ. 14, 503–521.
Efron, B., Tibshirani, R., 1986.Bootstrap methods for standard errors, confidence intervals,
and other measures of statistical accuracy. Stat. Sci. 1, 54–75.
Efron, B., Tibshirani, R., 1993.An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Chapman and Hall, New
## York.
Engelen, O., Kaiser, D.G., 2008.A primer on Energy Hedge Hunds. In: Fabozzi, F.J., Fuss, R.,
Kaiser, D. (Eds.), The Handbook of Commodity Investing. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ,
pp. 549–569.
Fama, E., 1970.Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work. J. Financ.
## 25, 383–417.
Fuertes, A.M., Miffre, J., Rallis, G., 2010.Tactical allocation in commodity futures markets:
combining momentum and term structure signals. J. Bank. Financ. 34, 2530–2548.
Girma, P.B., Paulson, A.S., 1998.
Seasonality in petroleum futures spreads. J. Futur. Mark.
## 18, 581–598.
Girma, P.B., Paulson, A.S., 1999.Risk arbitrage opportunities in petroleum futures spreads.
## J. Futur. Mark. 18, 931–955.
Hatemi-J, A., Roca, E., 2006.Calculating the optimal hedge ratio: constant, time varying
and the Kalman Filter approach. Appl. Econ. Lett. 13, 293–299.
Hatemi-J, A., Roca, E., 2014.Estimating the optimal hedge ratio in the presence of poten-
tial unknown structural breaks. Appl. Econ. 46, 790–795.
Koch, N., 2014.Tail events: a new approach to understanding extreme energy commodity
prices. Energy Econ. 43, 195–205.
Kwon, K.-Y., Kish, R., 2002.Technical trading strategies and return predictability: NYSE.
## Appl. Financ. Econ. 12, 639–653.
Lautier, D., Galli, A., 2004.Simple and extended Kalmanfilters: an application to term
structures of commodity prices. Appl. Financ. Econ. 14, 963–973.
Lean, H.H., McAleer, M., Wong, W.-K., 2010.Market efficiency of oil spot and futures: a
mean-variance and stochastic dominance approach. Energy Econ. 32, 979–986.
Lento, C., Gradojevic, N., Wright, C.S., 2007.Investment information content in Bollinger
## Bands? Appl. Financ. Econ. Lett. 3, 263–267.
Leung, J., Chong, T., 2003.An empirical comparison of moving average envelopes and
## Bollinger Bands. Appl. Econ. Lett. 10, 339–341.
Levich, R., Thomas, L., 1993.The significance of technical trading-rule profits in the foreign
exchange market: a bootstrap approach. J. Int. Money Financ. 12, 451–474.
Lo, A., Mamaysky, H., Wang, J., 2000.Foundations of technical analysis: computational algo-
rithms, statistical inference and empirical implementation. J. Financ. 55, 1705–1770.
Locke, P.R., Venkatesh, P.C., 1997.Futures market transactions costs. J. Futur. Mark. 172,
## 229–245.
Marshall, B.R., Cahan, R.H., Cahan, J.M., 2008.Can commodity futures be profitably traded
with quantitative market timing strategies? J. Bank. Financ. 32, 1810–1819.
Miffre, J., Rallis, G., 2007.Momentum strategies in commodity futures markets. J. Bank.
## Financ. 31, 1863–1886.
Park, C.-H., Irwin, S., 2007.What do we know about the profitability of technical analysis?
## J. Econ. Surv. 21, 786–826.
Petris, G., Petrone, S., Campagnoli, P., 2009.Dynamic Linear Models With R. Springer
## Science, New York.
Sanders, D.R., Boris, K., Manfredo, M., 2004.Hedgers, funds, and small speculators in the
energy futures markets: an analysis of the CFTC's Commitments of Traders reports.
## Energy Econ. 26, 425–445.
## Schwartz, E., 1997.
The stochastic behavior of commodity prices: implications for valua-
tion and hedging. J. Financ. 52, 923–973.
## 200920102011201220132014
## −4
## −2
## 0
## 2
## 4
## 6
## 8
z−Score WTI 1+2 200 days
Fig. 2.Trading system example for front-month and second-month WTI futures.Note:
Thisfigure shows the z-score calculated for WTI front-month and second-month futures
with a moving average and rolling standard deviation of 200 days for thefive year period
2009–2013. Note that thefirstz-scoreiscalculated with thefirst 200 days of data available
late in 2009. The solid red lines indicate the entry score of 2 and−2, the dashed red lines
are the exit scores of 0.2 and−0.2. The gray shaded area indicates periods where the fu-
tures where in backwardation whereas the white area indicates contango.
318T. Lubnau, N. Todorova / Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319

Shambora, W.E., Rossiter, R., 2007.Are there exploitable inefficiencies in the futures
market for oil? Energy Econ. 29, 18–27.
Shen, Q., Szakmary, A., Sharma, S.C., 2007.An examination of momentum strategies in
commodity futures markets. J. Futur. Mark. 27, 227–256.
Shleifer, A., 2000.Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. Oxford
## University Press.
Stridsman, T., 2001.Trading systems that work: building and evaluating effective trading
systems. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Szakmary, A., Shen, Q., Sharma, S.C., 2010.Trend-following trading strategies in commod-
ity futures: a re-examination. J. Bank. Financ. 34, 409–426.
Tabak, B.M., Cajueiro, D.O., 2007.Are the crude oil markets becoming weakly efficient
over time? a test for time-varying long-range dependence in prices and volatility.
## Energy Econ. 29, 28–36.
Wang, Y., Liu, L., 2010.Is WTI crude oil market becoming weakly efficient over time? New
evidence from multiscale analysis based on detrendedfluctuation analysis. Energy
## Econ. 32, 987–992.
Wang, T., Yang, J., 2010.Nonlinearity and intraday efficiency tests on energy futures
markets. Energy Econ. 32, 496–503.
319T. Lubnau, N. Todorova / Energy Economics 51 (2015) 312–319