

Enhancing Multi-Step Brent Oil Price Forecasting with
Ensemble Multi-Scenario Bi-GRU Networks
## Mohammed Alruqimi
a
## , Luca Di Persio
a
a
University of Verona, Verona, Italy
## Abstract
Despite  numerous  research  efforts  in  applying  deep  learning  to  time  series
forecasting, achieving high accuracy in multi-step predictions for volatile time
series like crude oil prices remains a significant challenge.  Moreover,  most
existing approaches primarily focus on one-step forecasting, and the perfor-
mance often varies depending on the dataset and specific case study.  In this
paper, we introduce an ensemble model to capture Brent oil price volatility
and  enhance  the  multi-step  prediction.   Our  methodology  employs  a  two-
pronged approach.  First, we assess popular deep-learning models and the im-
pact of various external factors on forecasting accuracy.  Then, we introduce
an ensemble multi-step forecasting model for Brent oil prices.  Our approach
generates accurate forecasts by employing ensemble techniques across mul-
tiple forecasting scenarios using three BI-GRU networks.  Extensive experi-
ments were conducted on a dataset encompassing the COVID-19 pandemic
period,  which  had  a  significant  impact  on  energy  markets.   The  proposed
model’s performance was evaluated using the standard evaluation metrics of
## ∗
corresponding author
Email addresses:mohammed.alruqimi@univr.it(Mohammed Alruqimi),
luca.dipersio@univr.it(Luca Di Persio)
Preprint submitted to International Journal of Computational Intelligence SystemsJuly 17, 2024
arXiv:2407.11267v1  [cs.LG]  15 Jul 2024

MAE, MSE, and RMSE. The results demonstrate that the proposed model
outperforms benchmark and established models.
Keywords:Crude oil price forecasting, Brent oil forecasting, sentiment
Bi-GRU, time series forecasting
## 1. Introduction
Accurate predictions of oil prices are essential due to their vital role in
the global economy.  However, the prediction of crude oil prices is renowned
for its obscurity and complexity.  The high degree of volatility, unpredictable,
irregular events, and complex interconnections among market factors make
it extremely challenging to accurately forecast the fluctuations in crude oil
prices.   The  dynamic  interplay  of  supply  and  demand  and  changes  in  oil
prices are influenced by external factors such as economic growth, financial
markets, geopolitical conflicts, warfare, and political considerations [1, 2, 3].
A variety of methodologies have been utilised for predicting crude oil prices,
involving the application of econometric and statistical time series analysis
techniques  such  as  VAR  [4],  ARIMA,  GARCH  [5],  VMD  [6],  and  Walvet
decomposition [7].  In more recent studies, there has been a prevalent use of
machine  learning  models  and  hybrid  approaches  [2,  8,  9]  in  the  literature.
Nevertheless, achieving accurate oil price forecasting remains a challenging
task, particularly in terms of multi-step forecasting.  Traditional econometric
and statistical methods are often inadequate for forecasting oil prices due to
many  challenges  related  to  the  irregular  characteristics  of  energy  markets,
such as non-stationarity, multi-frequency, non-linearity, and chaotic proper-
ties [10].  To overcome these challenges,  AI models have gained significant
## 2

popularity for oil price prediction.  In contrast to traditional statistical and
econometric models, AI provides a valuable alternative approach to capture
complex nonlinear characteristics of the crude oil price movement.  There is
an effort to exploit the emergent advances in deep-learning machine models
(such as Transformers and GANs) for time series analysis [11, 12].  Despite
the great success achieved by these models in processing natural languages
and  generating  images  and  videos,  Long  short-term  memory  (LSTM)  and
gated recurrent unit (GRU) networks still maintain their popularity for time
series forecasting [13, 14, 15].  Their popularity could be attributed to their
ability to effectively capture temporal dependencies, which is crucial for accu-
rately predicting future values in a time series. They are also significantly less
complex to train than more modern models such as GANs and transformers.
Also, a vast amount of data is required to train transformers, which makes
them inefficient for tasks involving smaller datasets, such as daily-based oil
price  forecasting.   Additionally,  most  current  research  focuses  on  one-day-
ahead forecasting or utilises complex combinations of layers and models with
high computational complexity.  Despite these efforts, multi-step forecasting
accuracy remains suboptimal.
This study proposes to blind forecasts generated from three different sce-
narios across Bi-GRU networks.  To this end, we start by assessing the fore-
cast performance of various architectures of deep learning models( popular
deep learning models used in the literature for price forecasting) to optimise
our model selection.  Then, we propose a novel effective model (Abbreviated
as  ERS-Bi-GRU,  denoting  its  main  elements—Ensemble,  Residual,  Senti-
mental, and Bi-Directional Gated Recurrent Units) for Brent price forecast-
## 3

ing.   Our  experiments  additionally  evaluate  the  influence  of  incorporating
three external factors – the USD index (USDX), Saudi energy sector index
(TENI),  and  sentiment  score  (SENT)  –  on  enhancing  prediction  accuracy.
The contributions of this paper are threefold:
•Introduction of an effective ensemble model for forecasting multi-step
Brent crude oil prices.
•Evaluation of various established deep learning architectures and com-
binations for oil price forecasting, discerning the optimal architecture
within this domain.  To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study
to compare RNN-based models and more recent and complex models
like transformers for oil price prediction.
•Evaluate the influence of external factors on Brent price movement.
The proposed model (ERS-Bi-GRU) has been compared against well-known
benchmarks  and  established  models  in  the  literature  to  evaluate  its  fore-
casting  accuracy.   The  obtained  results  indicate  that  the  proposed  model
outperforms the benchmark models.  The rest of the paper is organised as
follows.  Section (2) provides an overview of recent literature related to oil
price forecasting.  Section(4) describes the dataset used in this study.  Section
(5) outlines the methodology, Section (6) describes the experimental setup
and results, and finally the conclusion.
- Literature review
Recent years have witnessed strong growth in adopting machine learning
for time series forecasting, driven by its remarkable ability to uncover intri-
## 4

cate and non-linear patterns within the data. Researchers have employed var-
ious Ml networks such as long-short-term memory (LSTM) [3, 12, 16], gated
recurrent unite (GRU) [17, 18, 19], convolutional neural network (CNN) [20],
and transformer models [21] to predict crude oil prices based on historical
price  data  and  some  relevant  features.   Machine  learning  approaches  often
require extensive feature engineering and can be sensitive to the quality and
availability of data.  Many researchers incorporated additional data sources,
such as macroeconomic and technical indicators, social media sentiment, and
news articles, to enhance prediction accuracy.  Additionally, advancements in
natural language processing and sentiment analysis techniques have allowed
for a more comprehensive understanding of the impact of geopolitical events
and news on oil prices [3, 19, 22, 23].  A popular approach combines different
neural networks with statistical and economic methods to improve crude oil
forecasting.  For instance, many researchers have merged RNN networks with
CNN  and  self-attention  mechanisms  to  capture  temporal,  local,  and  long-
term dependencies in historical price data [24, 25].  Statistical and time series
analysis methods (such as variational mode decomposition (VMD), empirical
mode decomposition (EMD), Granger causality, Gaussian process, complete
ensemble empirical mode decomposition with adaptive noise (CEEMDAN))
are also prevalent alongside neural networks in recent approaches (i.e. [3, 19]).
## 3. Preliminaries
As listed in Table 1, the targeted networks selected for the experiments in-
clude LSTM, GRU, CNN-LSTM, CNN-LSTM-att, Transformer, Autoformer,
Informer, and TimsNet.  GRU and LSTM networks have been selected due to
## 5

their established effectiveness in time series forecasting tasks [12, 17].  Com-
bining CNN and LSTM networks and attention is another popular approach
widely employed in the literature.  CNNs excel at extracting local features
from time series data by applying learnable filters that capture spatial re-
lationships  within  specific  time  windows.The  CNN  extracts  relevant  local
features,  while  the  LSTM  and  GRU  model  long-term  dependencies.   Ad-
ditionally, the self-attention mechanisms effectively directs attention across
the time series data.  On the other hand,  transformers have demonstrated
remarkable achievements across various domains beyond just NLP. Over the
last  three  years,  transformer-based  architectures  (including  Informer  [26],
Autoformer [11]) have been adapted for time series tasks.  TimesNet [27] is
another cutting-edge CNN-based-structure model introduced in April (2023).
## 4. Dataset
4.1. Dataset description
The initial dataset used in this paper encompasses eight variables:  clos-
ing prices of Brent oil, USD index, Saudi Energy index, Saudi Tadawul All
Share index,  S&P 500 index,  Natural Gas index,  Gold index,  and a senti-
mental score.  These variables span 2,380 observations from January 2012,
to April 2021,  capturing the period impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic
on energy and stock markets.  This time range was specifically chosen due to
the availability of sentiment scores for this period.  Figure (1) displays the
time-series plot of Brent’s daily closing price.  The figure shows that sharp
fluctuations in crude oil logistics and production are often linked to world
events.  Extensive research has explored the influence of industrial commodi-
## 6

Figure 1:Brent oil price trend from 2012 to 2021
ties, indices (such as USD, S&P 500, Natural Gaz, and Gold), and sentiment
analysis extracted from news articles, financial reports, and even tweets on
the energy market [28, 29, 30, 22, 23].  External factors that affect the move-
ment of crude oil prices could be categorised into supply, demand, financial,
political, and major events factors [28].  These factors are inter-correlated; for
instance, supply and demand movement may be subject to political factors
and world events.
## 4.2. Correlation-based Feature Selection
Correlation-based Feature Selection is a method to identify and select the
most relevant features from a dataset by analysing the relationship between
each  feature  and  the  target  variable.   This  technique  helps  select  features
that can play the most significant role in predicting the target variable.  We
created  a  filtered  dataset  includes  only  three  external  variables  from  our
initial  dataset,  to  be  used  as  input  features  to  our  models  alongside  the
Brent  oil  prices,  based  on  their  strong  correlation  with  Brent  prices.   We
used  a  Spearman  correlation  coefficient  threshold  of  0.6  to  identify  these
variables, as shown in Figure (2).  Therefore, the three variables enumerated
below  have  been  designated  for  the  subsequent  experimentation  alongside
## 7

the target variable (Brent crude oil prices).  The impact of these variables on
the prediction performance has been further evaluated experimentally during
the models training, as detailed in Section 6
Figure 2:Heatmap Spearman Correlation
-  Sentiment score (SENT): We used an accumulative sentimental score
provided  by  CrudeBERTPlus  model  and  presented  in  [22].   Crude-
BERT is a variant of FinBERT that has been fine-tuned towards as-
sessing  the  impact  of  market  events  on  crude  oil  prices,  focusing  on
frequently occurring market events and their effects on market prices
according  to  Adam  Smith’s  theory  of  supply  and  demand.   Mainly,
CrudeBERT dataset used headlines originating from 1034 unique news
sources, of which the majority has been published on the Dow Jones
newswires  (approx.    21,200),  followed  by  Reuters  (approx.    3,000),
## 8

Bloomberg  (approx.  1,100),  and Platts  (approx.  870).  More details
about generating this sentiment score are found in the paper [22]; the
data is publicly available and can be reached following this link.
-  USDX Index:  The U.S. dollar index (USDX) measures the value of the
U.S. dollar relative to a basket of foreign currencies.  There is a negative
correlation between crude oil and the USDX index.  USDX historical
dataset has been obtained for the same period from Investing.
-  Saudi energy sector index (TENI) contains two companies working in
the energy sector (Arabian Drilling Co and Rabigh Refining & Petro-
chemical Co).  The historical dataset of this index has been obtained for
the same period from https://uk.investing.com/indices/tpisi-historical-
data.
4.3. Data preparation
Our  training  data  have  been  standardised  by  removing  the  mean  and
scaling to unit variance.  To incorporate observations of all features, we run
a left-join merge between the Brent crude oil price time series and the other
three input time series.  On the other hand, the missing values in the three
external factors have been filled in by running a Linear Interpolation function:
Let’sX
t
is a null value,X
t
## = (X
t−1
## +X
t+1
)/2.  The dataset has been split into
train/valid and test as follows:  Training set:  from 2012-01-03 to 2019-10-10;
Validation set:  from 2019-10-11 to 2020-06-23; and Test set from 2020-06-24
to 2021-04-01.
## 9

Figure 3:Methodology flowchart
## 5. Methodology
This work presents a hybrid approach, based on deep learning models and
times-series volatility analysis, for multi-step forecasting of Brent crude oil
prices.  Furthermore, it examines the impact of external factors on prediction
accuracy,  identifies the most  suitable deep learning  architecture,  and opti-
mises time steps and hyperparameters for improved forecasting performance.
To this end, we followed the steps outlined below, illustrated by Figure
(3).  Firstly, we collected eight historical data (eight-time series), performed
a correlation-based test to select only the most correlated variables for the
next phase,  and prepared our filtered dataset,  as described in Section (4).
The filtered dataset comprises daily historical observations of Brent crude oil
prices, along with USDX, SENT, and TENI.
## 10

Secondly (in the first stage experiments), we conducted experiments using
different architectures of GRU, LSTM, CNN and transformer-based models
adapted for time series forecasting.  A wide range of experiments was car-
ried out, considering various model architectures, time steps and forecasting
horizons.   We  trained  each  model  with  univariate  and  multivariate  inputs,
incorporating  the  three  external  factors  (USDX,  NETI,  and  SENT)  indi-
vidually  and  collectively.   We  compared  the  performance  of  each  model  in
one-step and multi-step horizon forecasting, as discussed in Section (6).  We
evaluated the results obtained by each model using MAE, MSE and RMSE
metrics.  This phase’s objective is to identify the most effective model exper-
imentally.  It features for our case study, which will be used in the following
(final) phase to produce the ensemble forecast.
Finally, based on the results and observations from the previous phase,
we built the ERS-Bi-GRU model, which merges forecasts of three Bi-GRU
networks performing three forecasting scenarios, as detailed in Section (7.5)
The ERS-GRU model demonstrated superior performance compared to other
targeted and created benchmark models.
## 6. Experiments
This section highlights a representative sample of the experiments carried
out, the evaluation metrics used, and the best results achieved by each model.
6.1. Error evaluation metrics
To evaluate the performance of each model, Three commonly used eval-
uation metrics were employed:  Mean Squared Error (MSE), Mean Absolute
Error (MAE), and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). Mean Absolute Error
## 11

(MAE) measures the average absolute difference between the predicted and
actual values.  It is calculated as
MAE(y,ˆy) =
## P
## N−1
i=0
## |y
i
## −ˆy
i
## |
## N
Mean Squared Error (MSE) calculates the average squared difference between
the predicted and actual values.  It is computed as
MSE(y,ˆy) =
## P
## N−1
i=0
## (y
i
## −ˆy
i
## )
## 2
## N
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) is the square root of the MSE, providing
a measure of the average magnitude of the error.  It is given by:
RMSE(y,ˆy) =
s
## P
## N−1
i=0
## (y
i
## −ˆy
i
## )
## 2
## N
These  evaluation  metrics  allow  for  quantifying  the  accuracy  and  precision
of the model’s predictions.  Lower MSE, MAE, and RMSE values indicate
better performance, indicating smaller discrepancies between the predicted
and actual values.  For a fair comparison, the models have been trained under
the same procedures but with a customised hyperparameter configuration for
each model.  MAE, MSE, and RMSE are calculated using real,  not scaled
prices.
6.2. Experimental design
Table (1) shows the experiment parameters.  To evaluate the performance
of each one of the targeted models (GRU, LSTM, Bi-GRU, Bi-LSTM, LSTM-
CNN,  LSTM-CNN-attention,  Autoformer,  Informer,  Transformer,  Times-
Net), a systematic approach was employed, considering various window sizes
## 12

(tuning range from 5 to 22) with one-step(one-ahead) and multi-step (three
ahead  days)  forecasts,  with  more  focus  on  the  multi-step  forecasting.   For
each model, two training scenarios were considered:  (1) utilising only Brent
crude  price  lags  (univariate)  and  (2)  incorporating  different  combinations
of the three external factors,  namely USDX, SENT, and TENI (multivari-
ate).  This approach enabled a comprehensive assessment of the models from
multiple perspectives.  To ensure a unified, systematic comparison, the mod-
els  were  applied  to  the  same  dataset  as  described  in  Section  (4).   A  uni-
fied dataset splitting and evaluation methodology was adopted to maintain
consistency throughout the experiments.  Hyperparameters were tuned sep-
arately  for  each  model  based  on  the  MSE  during  the  training  phase,  con-
sidering various factors such as window size, prediction horizon, input types
(univariate/multivariate), and the inclusion of external factors.
Table 1Experiments design
ModelsLSTM,   GRU,   Bi-LSTM,   Bi-GRU,   CNN-
Bi-LSTM, CNN-Bi-LSTM-att, Transformer,
Autoformer, Informer, TimesNet
External variables
## USDX, TENI, SENT
Window size
tuning range 5 - 22
Prediction horizon1,3
## 13

- Findings and Discussion
7.1. LSTM and GRU models
Despite  the  emergence  of  newer  advanced  models  in  the  field  of  deep
learning, LSTM and GRU models have maintained their significance and re-
main competitive options for time series prediction tasks.  These models excel
in preserving the temporal order.  The simplicity of model tuning and their
lower computation complexity compared to Transformers or GANs are fur-
ther advantages. Results obtained from GRU and LSTM models are shown in
Tables (2 and 3).  The best results achieved were by the SENT-GRU-1 model
(MAE 0.0647, MSE 0.0069,  and RMSE 0.0833) in terms of one day ahead
and  (MAE  1.0411,  MSE  2.0097  ,  and  RMSE  0.4176)  in  term  of  a  3-days
ahead  forecasting  with  the  SENT-Bi-GRU  model.   It  is  worth  mentioning
that the evaluation metrics ( MAE, MSE and RMSE) have been calculated
using the original values (re-normalised values).
Table 2GRU-based models
ModelHorizonMAEMSERMSE
## GRU31.21192.47641.5736
Bi-GRU31.10492.19911.4829
SENT-Bi-GRU31.04112.00971.4176
USD-Bi-GRU31.08742.13781.4621
TENI-Bi-GRU31.09602.15371.4675
## SENT-GRU-110.06470.00690.0833
## TENI-GRU-110.31040.15300.3912
## 14

Table 3LSTM-based models
ModelHorizonMAEMSERMSE
SENT-Bi-LSTM31.04552.02311.4223
USD-Bi-LSTM31.16902.39171.5465
TENI-Bi-LSTM31.15702.30381.5178
SENT-Bi-CNN-LSTM31.39553.38651.8402
SENT-Bi-CNN-LSTM-att31.45243.29131.8141
7.2. Transformers and TimesNet Experiments
Table 4Transformer-based models
prediction
## Length
## MAEMSERMSE
## 11.38543.28471.8123
SENT-Autoformer
## 32.80735.70482.3884
## 13.794818.69354.3236
SENT-Informer
## 35.046331.82705.6415
## 11.40993.39471.8424
SENT-TimesNet
## 33.41767.99132.8269
## 13.451215.2513.9052
SENT-Transformer
## 36.567130.43235.5165
## 11.53573.86181.9651
## Autoformer
## 35.38336.92926.0769
We examined a base Transformer model along with two well-known transformer-
## 15

based architectures specifically designed for time series tasks, namely Auto-
former [11] and Informer [26].  Additionally, we examined another advanced
time series model named TimesNet, which is based on a CNN architecture
using a temporal 2D-variation modelling approach [27].  Similar to the exper-
iments presented in the previous section, we conduct experiments incorporat-
ing the three external variables in various combinations.  Among the models
mentioned above, the best results were obtained regarding 3-day ahead fore-
casting by incorporating the sentiment score with Autoformer (MAE 2.8073,
MSE  5.7048,  RMSE  2.3884)  as  shown  in  Table  (4).   These  transformer-
based  models  exhibit  inferior  performance  compared  to  sequence  models.
This disparity can be attributed to the self-attention mechanism applied to
transformer-based models, which is somewhat “anti-order” and can lead to
temporal information loss.  This loss is usually not a significant concern in
semantic-rich applications like natural language processing (NLP), where the
meaning of a sentence remains largely preserved even if the word order is al-
tered.   However,  when  dealing  with  time  series  data,  the  primary  focus  is
modelling the temporal relation within a continuous sequence of points.  Ad-
ditionally,  it’s  essential  to  acknowledge  the  relatively  higher  training  time
and  complexities  associated  with  Transformers  regarding  the  difficulty  in
fine-tuning  the  hyperparameters  compared  to  more  traditional  models  like
GRU or LSTM.
7.3. External variables
The impact of three external time series variables on prediction accuracy
has been investigated:  USDX, TENI, and the cumulative sentimental score
(SENT). The initial part of the models’ names indicates the integrated vari-
## 16

ables;  for  example,  ”SENT-Bi-GRU”  signifies  a  Bi-GRU  model  where  the
sentiment index serves as an input.  The results shown in Tables (2 and 3)
suggest that the cumulative sentimental score (SENT) is the most effective
external time series variable for improving the prediction accuracy of Brent
crude oil price.  SENT is more effective because it captures the overall sen-
timent  of  the  market,  which  can  be  a  valuable  predictor  of  future  prices.
USDX and TENI, on the other hand, may not be as effective predictors be-
cause they only capture specific aspects of the market, such as the strength
of the US dollar or the price of oil.
7.4. SENT-Bi-GRU
Among all the previous experiments conducted, the SENT-BI-GRU net-
work, which is a Bi-GRU network integrated with sentiment index, demon-
strated the highest accuracy performance.  SENT-Bi-GRU is a simple and
effective  bidirectional  GRU  architecture  incorporating  a  cumulative  senti-
ment index.  The architecture of this network consists of a bidirectional GRU
network followed by two fully connected layers, all connected through ReLU
activation functions.  The best performance has been achieved with a window
size of 5 time steps, a batch size of 16, and the AdamW optimiser.
7.5. ERS-Bi-GRU
To further refine the predictive capabilities,  we incorporated a residual
analysis into the previous model (SENT-Bi-GRU). The main idea is to en-
semble the forecasts of two Bi-GRU networks.  One network incorporates a
sentimental index as an input feature, while the other incorporates a residual
component as an input feature (Figure 4 depicts the residual component).
## 17

The forecasts from these two networks are then fused using a weighted av-
eraging  method,  resulting  in  a  more  robust  and  accurate  prediction.   The
objective  is  to  enhance  capturing  fluctuations  and  irregularities  in  the  oil
market.  We assume that we can model the price fluctuations with the help
of the sentiment index and the residual component.
Figure 4:Crude Brent oil price components
The proposed models, denoted as Ensemble Sentiment-Residual BiGRU
(ESR-BiGRU), involve the following steps:
-  Train  a  Bi-GRU  model  to  future  crude  oil  prices.   The  model  takes
the historical crude oil prices and sentiment index as inputs.  LetP
t
represent  the  crude  oil  price  at  timetandS
t
denote  the  sentiment
index  simultaneously.   The  forecast  from  Bi-GRU  can  be  denoted  as
f orecast
## 1
## =F
Bi-GRU
## (P
t
## , S
t
## )
-  Train a Bi-GRU model:  This model takes sentiment indexSand the
residual componentR(calculated by removing the trend from the oil
prices) as inputs and learns to predict the unpredictable variations in
oil prices.  LetR
t
represent the residual at timetandS
t
denote the
sentiment  index  simultaneously.   The  forecast  from  Bi-GRU  can  be
denoted asf orecast
## 2
## =F
Bi-GRU
## (R
t
## , S
t
## )
## 18

Figure 5:One-ahead day forecasts using SENT-GRU, SENT-LSTM models
-  Train  a  Bi-GRU  model:  This  model  takes  historical  crude  oil  prices
Pand  the  residual  componentRas  inputs  and  learns  to  predict  fu-
ture  crude  oil  prices.   The  forecast  from  this  Bi-GRU  is  denoted  as
f orecast
## 3
## =F
Bi-GRU
## (P
t
## , R
t
## )
-  Calculate the final forecast:  The last forecast is obtained by combining
the three forecasts as follows:F orcat
f inal
= ((f orecast
## 3
−f orecast
## 2
## ∗
## W
## 1
## )∗W
## 2
) + (f orecast
## 1
## ∗W
## 3
## ).
This model outperforms all the other models examined in this paper and
benchmark models, achieving MAE 1.04475, MSE 1.9946 and RMSE 1.4123
7.6. Discussion and benchmark comparison
In general, the significance of the experiment results is as follows:  First,
simple  models  (GRU  and  LSTM)  outperform  transformer  and  TimesNet
models for Brent crude oil price forecasting; Second, incorporating crude oil-
relevant sentimental index is demonstrated to be effective and promising to
help in estimating the fluctuation level of the price.  However, among the var-
ious models considered, our findings reveal that Bidirectional (LSTM/GRU)
models yield the best performance.  While Bi-GRU outperforms slightly the
## 19

Table 5ERS-Bi-GRU model results versus other created benchmark models.  The values
are calculated using the actual, not scaled prices.
HorizonMAEMSERMSE
ERS-Bi-GRU31.04475   1.9946   1.4123
Bi-GRU31.10492.19911.4829
SENT-Bi-GRU31.04112.00971.4176
SENT-Bi-LSTM31.04552.02311.4223
SENT-Bi-CNN-LSTM31.39553.38651.8402
SENT-Bi-CNN-LSTM-att31.45243.29131.8141
SENT-Autoformer32.80735.70482.3884
SENT-TimesNet33.41767.99132.8269
Figure 6:3-ahead day forecasts, ERS-Bi-GRU model versus other benchmark models
Bi-LSTM. We obtained the best results of forecasting with the ESR-Bi-GRU
model (MAE 1.04475, MSE 1.9946, and RMSE 1.4123) for a 3-days ahead
forecasting as shown in Table (5).  It is worth mentioning that MAE, MSE,
and RMSE have been calculated using the re-scaled predicted values.  Opti-
## 20

mal time-step values for different models are among (5, 10,17, and 22), with
16 of batch size.
Figures (5,  6) depict samples of the forecasting results of the proposed
model and the other created benchmark models.  The proposed model (ERS-
Bi-GRU) exhibits a high level of accuracy in forecasting the closing prices of
Brent crude oil, demonstrating a solid alignment between its predictions and
the observed values.  This highlights the model’s ability to provide precise
forecasts for crude oil prices.
## 8. Conclusion
This work follows a comprehensive methodology to achieve accurate multi-
step forecasting for crude Brent prices.  We started by conducting a compar-
ative analysis of the performance of various architectures of six deep learning
networks(GRU, LSTM, Autoformer,  Informer,  Transformer,  TimesNet) for
Brent crude price forecasting.  In addition, it introduces a sample and effi-
cient model,  ERS-Bi-GRU, for multi-step forecasting of Brent crude price.
Our  experiments  go  beyond  the  models  by  examining  the  significance  of
external  factors  that  commonly  influence  the  crude  oil  market.   By  incor-
porating these additional factors,  the evaluation aims to provide a holistic
understanding of the models’ forecasting capabilities in real-world scenarios.
The  results  demonstrated  that  sequence-based  models  (GRU  and  LSTM)
outperform transformer-based models for forecasting crude oil prices. The re-
sults showed that the proposed ERS-Bi-GRU model outperforms benchmark
models in the field and state-of-the-art models (Autoformer and TimesNet)
regarding one/multi-step forecasting.  The results also demonstrated the im-
## 21

portance of extraneous factors to improve the forecasting accuracy.  Finally,
it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  nature  of  the  data  significantly  influences
training models for forecasting tasks and is extremely sensitive to hyperpa-
rameter configurations.  Therefore, efficient algorithms for optimising hyper-
parameter configuration are recommended.
In  future  work,  we  seek  to  enhance  this  model  by  integrating  optimi-
sation  algorithms  (such  as  Particle,  Swarm  Optimization,  Gravity  Search,
algorithm, and Gray Wolf Optimizer) for hyperparameter tuning.  Addition-
ally, we plan to incorporate the proposed model within a GAN architecture
and  add  SDE  solvers  for  modelling  volatility  and  noise.   Furthermore,  we
intend to apply this approach to financial data.
## Data Availability
The dataset used in this paper can be accessed through this GitHub repos
## Funding
No external funding was received for this research.
## References
[1]  H.  Miao,   S.  Ramchander,   T.  Wang,   D.  Yang,   Influential  factors
in  crude  oil  price  forecasting,  Energy  Economics  68  (2017)  77–88.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2017.09.010.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0140988317303134
## 22

[2]  Q.  Lu,  S.  Sun,  H.  Duan,  S.  Wang,  Analysis  and  forecasting  of  crude
oil price based on the variable selection-lstm integrated model, Energy
## Informatics 4 (2) (2021) 47.doi:10.1186/s42162-021-00166-4.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1186/s42162-021-00166-4
[3]  Z.   Jiang,    L.   Zhang,    L.   Zhang,    B.   Wen,    Investor   sentiment
and   machine   learning:Predicting   the   price   of   china’s   crude
oil   futures   market,    Energy   247   (2022)   123471.doi:https:
## //doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2022.123471.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0360544222003747
[4]  K.   Drachal,    Forecasting   crude   oil   real   prices   with   averaging
time-varying   var   models,Resources   Policy   74   (2021)   102244.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2021.102244.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0301420721002555
[5]  H.  Mohammadi,   L.  Su,   International  evidence  on  crude  oil  price
dynamics:    Applications  of  arima-garch  models,   Energy  Economics
## 32  (5)  (2010)  1001–1008.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.
## 2010.04.009.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0140988310000654
[6]  Y. Huang, Y. Deng, A new crude oil price forecasting model based on
variational mode decomposition, Knowledge-Based Systems 213 (2021)
## 106669.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106669.
## 23

URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S095070512030798X
[7]  K.  He,  L.  Yu,  K.  K.  Lai,  Crude  oil  price  analysis  and  forecasting
using  wavelet  decomposed  ensemble  model,   Energy  46  (1)  (2012)
564–574,  energy  and  Exergy  Modelling  of  Advance  Energy  Systems.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2012.07.055.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0360544212006044
[8]  Z. Cen, J. Wang, Crude oil price prediction model with long short term
memory deep learning based on prior knowledge data transfer, Energy
## 169 (12 2018).doi:10.1016/j.energy.2018.12.016.
[9]  B.  Lindemann,  T.  M ̈uller,  H.  Vietz,  N.  Jazdi,  M.  Weyrich,  A  sur-
vey  on  long  short-term  memory  networks  for  time  series  prediction,
Procedia  CIRP  99  (2021)  650–655,  14th  CIRP  Conference  on  Intel-
ligent  Computation  in  Manufacturing  Engineering,  15-17  July  2020.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2021.03.088.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S2212827121003796
[10]  Z. Ftiti,  F. Jawadi,  On the oil price uncertainty,  The Energy Journal
0 (Special I) (2019).
[11]  H. Wu,  J. Xu,  J. Wang,  M. Long,  Autoformer:  Decomposition trans-
formers  with  auto-correlation  for  long-term  series  forecasting,  CoRR
## 24

abs/2106.13008 (2021).arXiv:2106.13008.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13008
[12]  C.  Deng,  L.  Ma,  T.  Zeng,  Crude  oil  price  forecast  based  on  deep
transfer  learning:   Shanghai  crude  oil  as  an  example  (2021).doi:
## 10.3390/su132413770.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.3390/su132413770
## [13]  Y.   Eren,
## ̇
Ibrahim   K ̈u ̧c ̈ukdemiral,    A   comprehensive   review   on
deep   learning   approaches   for   short-term   load   forecasting,    Re-
newable    and    Sustainable    Energy    Reviews    189    (2024)    114031.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2023.114031.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S1364032123008894
[14]  A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, Are transformers effective for time
series forecasting?  (2022).arXiv:2205.13504.
[15]  L.  Shen,  Y.  Wei,  Y.  Wang,  Gbt:   Two-stage  transformer  framework
for non-stationary time series forecasting, Neural Networks 165 (2023)
## 953–970.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2023.06.044.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0893608023003556
[16]  L.  Jovanovic,  D.  Jovanovic,  N.  Bacanin,  A.  Jovancai  Stakic,  M.  An-
tonijevic, H. Magd, R. Thirumalaisamy, M. Zivkovic, Multi-step crude
oil price prediction based on lstm approach tuned by salp swarm algo-
rithm  with  disputation  operator,  Sustainability  14  (21)  (2022).doi:
## 25

## 10.3390/su142114616.
URLhttps://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/14/21/14616
[17]  B. Wang, J. Wang, Energy futures and spots prices forecasting by hy-
brid sw-gru with emd and error evaluation, Energy Economics 90 (2020)
## 104827.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2020.104827.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0140988320301675
[18]  S.  Zhang,  J.  Luo,  S.  Wang,  F.  Liu,  Oil  price  forecasting:   A  hy-
brid   gru   neural   network   based   on   decomposition–reconstruction
methods,   Expert   Systems   with   Applications   218   (2023)   119617.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.119617.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0957417423001185
[19]  Y. Fang, W. Wang, P. Wu, Y. Zhao, A sentiment-enhanced hybrid model
for  crude  oil  price  forecasting,  Expert  Systems  with  Applications  215
## (2023) 119329.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.119329.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0957417422023478
[20]  K.   He,   Q.   Yang,   Y.   Zou,   Crude   oil   price   prediction   using   em-
bedding    convolutional    neural    network    model,Procedia    Com-
puter    Science    214    (2022)    959–964,9th    International    Confer-
ence   on   Information   Technology   and   Quantitative   Management.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2022.11.265.
## 26

URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S1877050922019779
[21]  C. Liu, K. Ruan, X. Ma, Dmeformer:  A newly designed dynamic model
ensemble  transformer  for  crude  oil  futures  prediction,  Heliyon  9  (6)
(2023)   e16715.doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.
e16715.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S2405844023039221
[22]  H.  Kaplan,  A.  Weichselbraun,  A.  M.  P.  Bra ̧soveanu,  Integrating  eco-
nomic theory, domain knowledge, and social knowledge into hybrid sen-
timent models for predicting crude oil markets, Cognitive Computation
(Mar 2023).doi:10.1007/s12559-023-10129-4.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-023-10129-4
[23]  L.-T.   Zhao,    Y.-Y.   Xing,    Q.-R.   Zhao,    X.-H.   Chen,    Dynamic
impacts    of    online    investor    sentiment    on    international    crude
oil   prices,    Resources   Policy   82   (2023)   103506.doi:https:
## //doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2023.103506.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0301420723002143
[24]  Hu,   Zhenda,   Crude  oil  price  prediction  using  ceemdan  and  lstm-
attention with news sentiment index, Oil Gas Sci. Technol. - Rev. IFP
Energies nouvelles 76 (2021) 28.doi:10.2516/ogst/2021010.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.2516/ogst/2021010
## 27

[25]  L.  Shan,  Y.  Liu,  M.  Tang,  M.  Yang,  X.  Bai,  Cnn-bilstm  hybrid
neural  networks  with  attention  mechanism  for  well  log  prediction,
Journal  of  Petroleum  Science  and  Engineering  205  (2021)  108838.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2021.108838.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S092041052100499X
## [26]  H. Zhou, S. Zhang, J. Peng, S. Zhang, J. Li, H. Xiong, W. Zhang, In-
former:  Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series fore-
casting, CoRR abs/2012.07436 (2020).arXiv:2012.07436.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2012.07436
## [27]  H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, M. Long, Timesnet: Temporal
2d-variation  modeling  for  general  time  series  analysis  (2023).arXiv:
## 2210.02186.
[28]  L.   Coleman,    Explaining   crude   oil   prices   fotios   petropoulosing
fundamental   measures,   Energy   Policy   40   (2012)   318–324,   strate-
gic    Choices    for    Renewable    Energy    Investment.doi:https:
## //doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.10.012.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0301421511007968
[29]  H.  Miao,   S.  Ramchander,   T.  Wang,   D.  Yang,   Influential  factors
in  crude  oil  price  forecasting,  Energy  Economics  68  (2017)  77–88.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2017.09.010.
URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
## S0140988317303134
## 28

[30]  J. Li, Z. Xu, H. Xu, L. Tang, L. Yu, Forecasting oil price trends with
sentiment  of  online  news  articles,  Asia-Pacific  Journal  of  Operational
Research 34 (02) (2017) 1740019.doi:10.1142/S021759591740019X.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1142/S021759591740019X
## Ethics Approval
Not applicable.
Corresponding author
Corresponding author:  Mohammed Alruqimi
## 29