

Deep learning systems for forecasting
the prices of crude oil and precious metals
## Parisa Foroutan
## 1
and Salim Lahmiri
## 1*

## Abstract
Commodity markets, such as crude oil and precious metals, play a strategic role
in the economic development of nations, with crude oil prices influencing geopoliti-
cal relations and the global economy. Moreover, gold and silver are argued to hedge
the stock and cryptocurrency markets during market downsides. Therefore, accu-
rate forecasting of crude oil and precious metals prices is critical. Nevertheless, due
to the nonlinear nature, substantial fluctuations, and irregular cycles of crude oil
and precious metals, predicting their prices is a challenging task. Our study contributes
to the commodity market price forecasting literature by implementing and compar-
ing advanced deep-learning models. We address this gap by including silver along-
side gold in our analysis, offering a more comprehensive understanding of the pre-
cious metal markets. This research expands existing knowledge and provides valuable
insights into predicting commodity prices. In this study, we implemented 16 deep-
and machine-learning models to forecast the daily price of the West Texas Intermedi-
ate (WTI), Brent, gold, and silver markets. The employed deep-learning models are
long short-term memory (LSTM), BiLSTM, gated recurrent unit (GRU), bidirectional
gated recurrent units (BiGRU), T2V-BiLSTM, T2V-BiGRU, convolutional neural networks
(CNN), CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-BiGRU, temporal convolutional network (TCN), TCN-BiLSTM,
and TCN-BiGRU. We compared the forecasting performance of deep-learning models
with the baseline random forest, LightGBM, support vector regression, and k-nearest
neighborhood models using mean absolute error (MAE), mean absolute percent-
age error, and root mean squared error as evaluation criteria. By considering different
sliding window lengths, we examine the forecasting performance of our models. Our
results reveal that the TCN model outperforms the others for WTI, Brent, and silver,
achieving the lowest MAE values of 1.444, 1.295, and 0.346, respectively. The BiGRU
model performs best for gold, with an MAE of 15.188 using a 30-day input sequence.
Furthermore, LightGBM exhibits comparable performance to TCN and is the best-
performing machine-learning model overall. These findings are critical for investors,
policymakers, mining companies, and governmental agencies to effectively anticipate
market trends, mitigate risk, manage uncertainty, and make timely decisions and strat-
egies regarding crude oil, gold, and silver markets.
Keywords: Crude oil forecasting, Precious metal forecasting, Deep learning, Temporal
convolutional networks, Time2Vector, LightGBM
## Open Access
© The Author(s) 2024. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits
use,  sharing,  adaptation,  distribution  and  reproduction  in  any  medium  or  format,  as  long  as  you  give  appropriate  credit  to  the  original
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the mate-
rial. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
## RESEARCH
Foroutan and Lahmiri
## Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854-024-00637-z
## Financial Innovation
*Correspondence:
salim.lahmiri@concordia.ca
## 1
Department of Supply Chain
and Business Technology
## Management, Concordia
## University, Montreal, Canada

Page 2 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
## Introduction
Nonrenewable commodities usually mined in certain countries can strongly impact their
economies,  policies,  currencies,  and  international  or  political  issues.  Energy  and  pre
## -
cious  metals  markets,  among  other  commodities,  are  well-known  alternatives  to  stock
markets (Pullen et al. 2014; Hussain Shahzad et al. 2017; Akbar et al. 2019; Adekoya et al.
2022;  Phan  et  al.  2016;  Sarwar  et  al.  2019).  Their  prices  are  critical  indicators  of  eco
## -
nomic  health  and  crucial  determinants  for  financial  planning  and  decision  making.  In
this  regard,  understanding  the  dynamics  of  such  markets  and  forecasting  their  evolu
## -
tions  is  crucial  for  portfolio  optimization  and  management.  Crude  oil,  a  crucial  energy
commodity,  is  pivotal  in  global  macroeconomics  and  influences  the  decisions  made  by
policymakers like governments and central banks. Fluctuations in crude oil prices have
profound  implications  for  a  country’s  political  and  economic  security;  therefore,  accu
## -
rate crude oil price forecasting is imperative. Crude oil market shocks in April 2020 and
their  impacts  have  increased  interest  in  understanding  oil  price  dynamics  (Wang  et  al.
2021; Murshed and Tanha 2021; Balcilar et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2022a, b; Enwereuzoh
et  al. 2021).  Conversely,  gold  is  important  for  investment  portfolio  diversification  and
hedging  (ben  Khelifa  et  al.  2021;  Reboredo  2013;  Baek  2019).  Gold  contributes  a  large
portion of the commodity reserves of major economies. As of September 2022, the offi
## -
cial  United  States  (US)  gold  reserve  was  8133.47  tons,  approximately  66.6%  of  total  US
reserves.
## 1
Given  these  markets’  multifaceted  nature,  forecasting  the  trajectories  of  these  com-
modities  is  crucial  in  financial  markets,  serving  as  an  essential  tool  for  investors,  pol-
icymakers,  and  analysts.  For  investors,  anticipating  price  movements  in  crude  oil  and
precious  metals  provides  a  strategic  advantage  in  optimizing  portfolio  performance
and  risk  management.  A  comprehensive  understanding  of  potential  price  fluctuations
allows investors to make informed decisions, allocate resources optimally, and ultimately
enhance  their  overall  financial  returns  (Bhowmik  and  Wang  2020).  In  contrast,  poli
## -
cymakers  rely  on  accurate  market  forecasts  to  develop  effective  economic  policies  and
mitigate  the  potential  impact  of  market  volatility  on  national  economies.  Fluctuations
in crude oil prices, for instance, can have cascading effects on inflation, trade balances,
and overall economic stability (Uzo-Peters et al. 2018; Xiuzhen et al. 2022; Periwal 2023).
Similarly,  precious  metal  prices  often  indicate  broader  economic  sentiments  and  can
influence monetary policies and international trade relationships.
In  this  context,  the  science  of  forecasting  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  providing  foresight
into  future  trends  in  crude  oil  and  precious  metal  prices.  Advanced  analytical  models
(Kou  et  al.  2021, 2022;  Li  et  al.  2022a, b;  Lahmiri  2023a),  statistical  methods  (Lahmiri
et  al. 2022;  Lahmiri  2023b),  machine  learning  (Lahmiri  et  al.  2023),  and  deep-learning
algorithms (Amirifar et al. 2023; Amirshahi and Lahmiri 2023a, b; Lahmiri and Bekiros
2019, 2020, 2021) enable analysts to search through vast datasets, identify patterns, and
make  predictions  that  are  invaluable  for  both  short-term  traders  and  long-term  inves
## -
tors (Abdullah Ahmed and Bin Shabri 2014; Zhao et al. 2015; Das et al. 2022; Jiang et al.
2022;  Liang  et  al.  2023).  Driven  by  this  motivation,  this  study  investigates  forecasting
## 1
https:// www. gold. org/ goldh ub/ data/ gold- reser ves- by- count ry.

Page 3 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

methodologies within the domains of crude oil and precious metals markets to enhance
the precision of price predictions.
Recent innovations in deep learning models seem promising for time-series forecast
## -
ing;  however,  the  crude  oil  and  precious  metals  forecasting  literature  struggles  to  use
these  models  for  price  prediction.  This  study  attempts  to  fill  this  gap  in  the  forecast
## -
ing  literature  by  applying  several  deep-  and  machine-learning  models  to  predict  the
daily closing prices of crude oil, gold, and silver. First, the time-series data of daily spot
prices  of  two  prominent  crude  oils,  West  Texas  Intermediate  (WTI)  and  Brent,  and
two  precious  metal  markets,  gold  and  silver,  are  gathered  and  normalized.  Then,  sev
## -
eral input sequences are prepared using the sliding window method with four different
window  lengths.  Next,  the  dataset  is  split  into  training,  validation,  and  test  sets  using
a  time-based  splitting  approach.  Finally,  a  comprehensive  set  of  16  forecasting  mod
## -
els,  consisting  of  12  deep-learning  models,  2  baseline-ensemble  models,  and  2  base-
line  machine-learning  models,  is  implemented  to  predict  the  next-day  market  price.
The  deep  learning  models  used  in  the  current  study  include  long  short-term  memory
(LSTM), bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM), gated recurrent units (GRU), bidirectional GRU
(BiGRU),  Time2Vector  BiLSTM  (T2V-BiLSTM),  Time2Vector  BiGRU  (T2V-BiGRU),
convolutional neural networks (CNN), hybrid CNN-BiLSTM, hybrid CNN-BiGRU, tem
## -
poral  convolutional  networks  (TCN),  hybrid  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  hybrid  TCN-BiGRU
models. Two baseline ensemble models are the random forest and LightGBM gradient-
boosting  models,  and  two  baseline  machine-learning  models  are  the  support  vector
regression (SVR) and k-nearest neighborhood (KNN) models.
Each  of  the  employed  models  has  its  strengths  and  limitations.  LSTM  models  are  a
type  of  recurrent  neural  networks  (RNN)  that  are  popular  for  their  ability  to  capture
long-term  dependencies,  overcome  the  gradient  vanishing  problem,  and  handle  varia
## -
ble-length sequences; however, LSTMs can be computationally expensive and prone to
overfitting,  requiring  regularization  techniques  (Yu  et  al.  2019).  GRU  models,  another
type of RNN, have a simpler architecture, resulting in faster training and inference times;
however, they may have limitations in capturing complex patterns compared with LSTM
models.  Bidirectional  models,  such  as  BiLSTM  or  BiGRU,  consider  both  forward  and
backward  information,  making  them  more  robust  to  variations  in  the  input  sequence
order; however, they are computationally complex and require more memory resources
(Khan  et  al.  2021).  CNNs  are  effective  at  capturing  local  patterns  and  features  within
time-series data. CNNs learn filters to detect specific temporal patterns and are transla
## -
tion invariant, meaning they can detect patterns regardless of their position in the input
sequence;  however,  CNNs  have  limitations,  such  as  the  requirement  for  fixed-length
inputs, limited consideration of temporal ordering, and the ability to capture long-term
dependencies.  Hybrid  CNN–LSTM  models  combine  the  strengths  of  both  CNNs  and
LSTMs, capturing spatial and temporal features. They are suitable for tasks that require
capturing  complex  patterns  in  time-series  data;  however,  they  can  be  less  interpretable
than  standalone  models  (Gharghory  2021).  TCNs  are  designed  to  capture  long-term
dependencies efficiently. They use dilated convolutions to capture information from sev
## -
eral past time steps. TCNs are adaptable to different time-series lengths without padding
or truncation; however, they can be complex to design and tune and are sensitive to input
scaling  (Gopali  et  al.  2021).  Ensemble  machine-learning  models  such  as  random  forest

Page 4 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
and  LightGBM  are  also  used  in  time-series  analysis.  Random  forest  combines  multiple
decision trees and offers high prediction accuracy and robustness against outliers. Light
## -
GBM is an efficient gradient-boosting framework that effectively handles large datasets.
Both models have their accuracy and generalization strengths but cannot explicitly cap
## -
ture  temporal  dependencies  (Ke  et  al.  2017).  SVR  is  a  flexible  model  that  can  capture
linear and nonlinear relationships; it focuses on support vectors, which greatly influence
the model’s decision boundary. SVR can handle high-dimensional datasets and complex
relationships between variables; however, the performance of SVR depends on selecting
appropriate  hyperparameters,  and  it  does  not  explicitly  model  temporal  dependencies.
KNN  is  an  instance-based  algorithm  that  makes  predictions  based  on  the  similarity  of
training instances; it requires no training phase but suffers from the curse of dimension
## -
ality and cannot capture temporal dependencies.
Our  paper  compares  the  forecasting  performance  of  these  models  by  mean  absolute
error  (MAE),  mean  absolute  percentage  error  (MAPE),  and  root  mean  squared  error
(RMSE)  error  functions.  This  paper  primarily  aims  to  answer  the  following  questions
through  empirical  experiments.  (1)  What  is  the  best  deep-learning  model  that  can
predict  crude  oil,  gold,  and  silver  spot  prices  reliably  and  precisely?  (2)  In  response  to
the  first  question,  does  a  particular  model  outperform  other  models  for  crude  oil  and
precious  metals  prices?  (3)  Which  input  sequence  length  is  more  informative  for  each
market’s price prediction? (4) Are hybrid models effective in forecasting crude oil, gold,
and  silver  spot  prices?  (5)  What  conclusions  about  the  properties  of  each  deep-learn
## -
ing  model  can  be  drawn  in  the  context  of  crude  oil  and  precious  metals  time-series
forecasting?
The  arrangement  of  the  rest  of  this  manuscript  is  as  follows.  “Literature  review”  sec
## -
tion  provides  an  overview  of  the  relevant  prior  research  and  summarizes  our  contri-
butions  to  the  existing  literature.  “Methodology”  section  explains  the  methods  and
performance evaluation criteria used in this study. “Empirical analysis and results” sec
## -
tion describes the datasets, demonstrates the results, and discusses our findings. Finally,
“Conclusion” section summarizes the paper and presents some managerial implications
and policy suggestions.
Literature review
Accurately  forecasting  financial  markets  is  a  critical  guide  for  determining  economic
policies.  Consequently,  researchers  have  dedicated  their  efforts  to  developing  and
improving models that capture the intrinsic behavior and dynamics of financial market
time  series.  The  prediction  methods  used  in  these  studies  generally  comprise  statisti
## -
cal or econometrics, machine learning, and deep-learning methods. Several forecasting
modeling  approaches  have  recently  been  applied  to  crude  oil  and  precious  metals.  For
instance,  Zhao  et  al.  (2018)  proposed  a  numerical  vector  trend  forecasting  method  for
predicting the daily spot price of Brent crude oil, outperforming traditional models such
as autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA), SVR, and wavelet analysis mod
## -
els.  Similarly,  Szarek  et  al.  (2020)  proposed  a  new  stochastic  distribution,  skewed  Stu-
dent’s t-distribution, for silver, copper, and gold time-series estimation, which accounts
for  the  time-dependent  parameters  and  non-Gaussian  behavior  of  time-series  data.

Page 5 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

Drachal  (2022)  employed  the  Bayesian  symbolic  regression  method  to  address  variable
uncertainty in monthly crude oil price forecasting.
Due  to  the  nonlinearity,  nonstationarity,  and  heteroscedasticity  of  crude  oil  and  pre
## -
cious metal markets, classical statistical forecasting models such as vector autoregressive
(VAR),  ARIMA,  and  autoregressive  distributed  lag  (ARDL)  struggle  to  perform  well  in
forecasting tasks. These models make assumptions about the normality and stationarity
of price data, which often do not hold for many time-series data for commodity markets.
As a result, recent studies have used machine- and deep-learning models, which excel in
handling nonlinear data and do not rely on the normality assumption for accurate price
predictions.  In  the  literature,  three  main  types  of  deep  neural  networks  are  used  for
sequence modeling, and they can be applied for time-series forecasting (Lim and Zohren
2021).  These  networks  include  (i)  RNNs  and  their  variants,  such  as  LSTM  (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997) and GRUs (Cho et al. 2014), (ii) CNNs (Lecun et al. 1998) and
their  recent  variant,  TCN  (Lea  et  al.  2016),  and  (iii)  transformer  (Vaswani  et  al.  2017)
and its variants (Devlin et al. 2018; He et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2019).
Several   studies   used   statistical,   machine   learning,   and   deep-learning   models   to
account for the importance of gold price forecasting. Alameer et al. (2019) used a multi
## -
layer perceptron model with a whale optimization algorithm for gold next-month price
forecasting.  This  model  demonstrates  a  lower  forecasting  error  than  ARIMA  model
forecasts. Madziwa et al. (2022) employed an ARDL model to forecast annual gold prices
using  lagged  gold  prices,  gold  demand,  and  treasury  bill  rates  as  predictors.  In  another
study, Zhang and Ci (2020) used the US Consumer Price Index, crude oil price, exchange
rate, and Dow Jones Industrial Price Index in a deep belief network to predict monthly
gold  prices.  Risse  (2019)  predicted  gold  excess  returns  to  the  risk-free  rate  of  return
using the ana SVR model. SVR finds the nonlinear relationship in the data by mapping a
linear function into a high-dimensional feature space. Tree-based ensemble models have
demonstrated promising performance in forecasting gold prices. Yuan (2023) leveraged
the XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin 2016) and LightGBM (Ke et al. 2017) models for gold
and  bitcoin  price  forecasting.  Furthermore,  deep-learning  methods  have  been  increas
## -
ingly used for gold price prediction. For instance, using association rules and the LSTM
mode,  Boongasame  et  al.  (2022)  predicted  the  price  of  gold.  Vidal  and  Kristjanpoller
(2020)  developed  a  hybrid  of  convolutional  neural  networks  and  long-  and  short-term
memory models (CNN–LSTM), which incorporate historical log-return series and time-
series data in an image format to predict the volatility of gold spot prices. Likewise, vari
## -
ous studies have used deep-learning models for crude oil price forecasting. Orojo et al.
(2019)  employed  a  multirecurrent  network  to  forecast  a  one-month  ahead  WTI  crude
oil price. Lin et al. (2022) forecasted crude oil futures prices using a BiLSTM-Attention-
CNN  model  with  wavelet  transform.  Swamy  and  Lagesh  (2023)  explored  the  effective
## -
ness of investor sentiments from Twitter in predicting the daily gold price by a wavelet
analysis  method  and  unveiled  a  strong  correlation  between  Twitter  sentiments  and  the
gold  price.  Fang  et  al.  (2023a, b)  forecasted  Brent  crude  oil  prices  using  an  improved
slope-based  method  based  on  empirical  mode  decomposition  (EMD)  and  feedforward
neural network (FNN) methods.
Conversely,  the  literature  on  forecasting  other  precious  metal  markets  is  relatively
limited. Sroka (2022) utilizes block bootstrap methods to forecast daily silver prices,

Page 6 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
while Salisu et al. (2020) tested the impact of Google Trends on forecasting the prices
of four precious metal markets using an ARDL model. Zhang et al. (2022a, b) intro
## -
duced  a  new  objective  function  to  forecast  commodity  markets,  including  silver
prices. To our knowledge, there is no precedent study to forecast the silver price using
machine- and deep-learning models. We attempt to fill this void in the literature.
Given  the  ongoing  improvements  in  natural  language  processing  (NLP)  tasks,
recent  studies  have  incorporated  news  text  and  Google  Trends  features  into  their
forecasting models. These approaches leverage the valuable information in the textual
data  to  enhance  the  accuracy  of  predictions.  For  example,  Li  et  al.  (2019)  extracted
text data from online news media and created sentiment features that were grouped
by their topics using a latent Dirichlet allocation method. Their topic-sentiment fore
## -
casting  model  shows  that  text  features  complement  financial  features  for  crude  oil
price  forecasting.  Similarly,  Bai  et  al.  (2022)  constructed  features  from  news  head
## -
lines  for  WTI  crude  oil  forecasting.  Fang  et  al.  (2023a, b)  employed  a  FineBERT
approach  to  extract  sentiment  information  from  crude  oil-related  news,  which  was
then  integrated  into  a  hybrid  attention-based  BiGRU  model  for  WTI  price  forecast
## -
ing. Kertlly de Medeiros et al. (2022) demonstrated performance enhancement using
a mixed data sampling model incorporating mixed-frequency data and a textual senti
## -
ment  indicator  for  oil  price  forecasting.  Salisu  et  al.  (2020)  utilized  an  econometric
ARDL model to show that search engine data from Google Trends significantly posi
## -
tively  affect  precious  metal  returns.  Similarly,  Tang  et  al.  (2020)  considered  Google
Trends  a  useful  predictor  in  a  multivariate  empirical  mode  decomposition  method
for  forecasting  Brent  crude  oil  spot  prices.  Other  EMD  methods  have  been  used  by
Wang et al. (2018), Qin et al. (2019), Yang et al. (2020), G. Li et al. (2022a, b), and Guo
et  al.  (2022)  in  their  proposed  crude  oil  forecasting  models.  Liang  et  al.  (2023)  also
used historical crude oil prices in a deep reinforcement learning algorithm to forecast
multistep  ahead  WTI,  Brent,  and  Oman  prices.  A  recent  review  paper  (Mohamed
and  Messaadia  2023)  highlights  that  artificial  neural  networks  and  support  vector
machines (SVMs) are the most popular artificial intelligence techniques used to fore
## -
cast crude oil prices. Collectively, these studies showcase the growing significance of
advanced forecasting methods to enhance the accuracy and reliability of predictions
in the crude oil and precious metal markets.
Some studies have achieved improved forecasting performances by developing ensem
## -
ble models. Zhao et al. (2017) combined the advantages of stacked denoising autoencod-
ers (SDAE) and bootstrap aggregation (bagging) techniques to model the nonlinear and
complex relationships of oil price factors and to generate multiple data sets for training a
set of base learners. Wang et al. (2020) proposed an ensemble of five linear and nonlinear
submodes to produce the prediction intervals of crude oil spot prices while optimizing
the weights of submodes using the gray wolf optimizer. Zhang et al. (2021) developed an
ensemble  deep-learning  model  for  electricity  price  series  prediction.  Jiang  et  al.  (2022)
combined a decomposition-ensemble approach optimized by the seagull algorithm with
sentiment analysis to forecast future crude oil prices. Su et al. (2022) proposed a hybrid
forecasting model using SVM, extreme learning machines, XGBoost, and LSTM models
to  predict  crude  oil  futures  series.  Sun  et  al.  (2022)  proposed  a  secondary  decomposi
## -
tion–reconstruction–ensemble approach for crude oil price forecasting.

Page 7 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

The  temporal  convolutional  networks  (TCNs)  (Lea  et  al.  2016)  are  variants  of  CNN
models  that  employ  casual  convolutions  and  dilations  to  predict  sequential  data  with
temporality and large receptive fields. A simple convolution can only look back at a fixed
timing  window,  whereas  a  TCN  uses  dilated  convolutions  to  achieve  a  large  receptive
field with fewer convolutional layers. TCNs capture long-term patterns using a hierarchy
of  temporal  convolutional  filters,  and  in  that  manner,  they  tend  to  outperform  bidirec
## -
tional  LSTM  models  and  are  a  magnitude  faster  to  train.  A  TCN  was  first  developed
for action detection in video data settings to account for spatial and temporal input fea
## -
tures (Lea et al. 2016). However, recently, TCNs have drawn more attention from schol-
ars  and  have  been  applied  to  various  time-series  data.  For  instance,  Lara-Benítez  et  al.
(2020)  utilized  a  TCN  model  to  forecast  electricity  demand  and  prices  in  Spain.  In  the
environmental  milieu,  Yan  et  al.  (2020)  predicted  the  El  Niño-Southern  Oscillation,  an
index measuring the earth’s climate variability, by applying an ensemble empirical mode
decomposition–TCN model. This model shows improved prediction performance com
## -
pared with the LSTM model.
Considering temporal patterns in predicting time-series data is a significant challenge
for  many  models.  Some  recent  studies  have  introduced  learnable  time  representations
to account for temporal patterns in sequential data (Xu et al. 2019, 2021; Li et al. 2017).
Among these studies, Kazemi et al. (2019) introduced the Time2Vector method to rep
## -
resent  sequential  data  as  periodic  and  nonperiodic  vectors  that  can  capture  complex
temporal patterns in data. Yang et al. (2021) improved the performance of an attention
neural network for nonintrusive load monitoring by applying the Time2Vector method.
This current study applies Time2Vector embedding to input series and incorporates the
resulting  periodic  and  nonperiodic  features  into  several  deep-learning  models  to  fore
## -
cast crude oil, gold, and silver prices. Table 1 summarizes the literature on crude oil and
precious metal forecasting.
Gradient-boosting  methods  are  powerful  predictive  models  for  many  tasks.  Borisov
et  al.  (2021)  compared  the  performance  of  tree-based  ensembles,  such  as  XGBoost,
LightGBM,  and  CatBoost  (Prokhorenkova  et  al.  2018),  with  some  deep-learning  mod
## -
els, including but not limited to multilayer perceptron, regularization learning networks,
neural oblivious decision ensembles, and transformers. They assert that machine learn
## -
ing tree-based models outperform deep-learning models in several prediction tasks with
tabular data; however, their study does not include deep-learning models for sequential
data and is silent about forecasting financial market prices. To address this shortfall, in
the  current  study,  we  will  use  tree-based  ensemble  models  such  as  random  forest  and
LightGBM  compared  with  12  deep-learning  models  and  two  other  machine-learning
models (KNN and SVR) to forecast daily crude oil and precious metals market prices.
This study makes significant contributions to the literature on forecasting commodity
market prices.
- Considering that there is limited literature on using deep-learning models to forecast
the price of commodity markets, this study implements and compares various types
of state-of-the-art deep-learning models for crude oil and precious metal spot price
forecasting.  Hence,  our  study  encompasses  several  forecasting  results  that  provide
comprehensive insights for crude oil, gold, and silver market players and investors.

Page 8 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
Table 1 Literature review of crude oil and precious metal forecasting
Method typeAuthor(s)Method(s)FeaturesData
## Financial
market
## Google
trend or
sentiment
WTIBrentGoldSilver
Statistical and
## Econometric
methods
Zhao et al.
## (2018)
## VTFM✓✓
Szarek et al.
## (2020)
## SGT✓✓✓
## Drachal
## (2022)
## BSR✓✓✓
Kertlly de
## Medeiros
et al. (2022)
## MIDAS✓✓✓
Salisu et al.
## (2020)
## ARDL✓✓✓✓
Tang et al.
## (2020)
## MEMD✓✓✓
Madziwa et al.
## (2022)
## ARDL✓✓
Swamy and
## Lagesh (2023)
wavelet
analysis
method
## ✓✓✓
## Sroka (2022)block
bootstrap-
## ARIMA
## ✓✓
## Machine
## Learning
methods
Zhao et al.
## (2017)
## Ensemble
(SDAE-bag-
ging)
## ✓✓
Bai et al.
## (2022)
AdaBoost.RT✓✓✓
Risse (2019)SVR✓✓
Yuan (2023)XGBoost &
LightGBM
## ✓✓
Wang et al.
## (2020)
## EPPA✓✓
Su et al.
## (2022)
ensemble✓OPEC crude
oil
Sun et al.
## (2022)
ensemble✓✓✓
## Deep Learn-
ing methods
Li et al. (2019)CNN✓✓✓
Fang et al.
(2023a, b)
FineBERT-
VMD-Att-
BiGRU
## ✓✓✓
Fang et al.
(2023a, b)
## ISBN-EMD-
## FNN
## ✓✓
Liang et al.
## (2023)
## Deeprein-
forcement
learning
## ✓✓✓
Alameer et al.
## (2019)
## MLP✓✓
Zhang and Ci
## (2020)
Deep belief
network
## ✓✓
## Boongasame
et al. (2022)
## LSTM✓✓

Page 9 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

-    Most  studies  on  precious  metals  focus  only  on  gold  price  predictions;  however,  this
study forecasts the price of both gold and silver to maintain a more general understand
## -
ing of the precious metal markets.
-   To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first in forecasting literature that applies
the  TCN  model,  Time2Vector  embedding  module,  and  hybrid  TCN-BiLSTM  and
TCN-BiGRU  models  to  forecast  the  spot  price  of  WTI,  Brent,  Gold,  and  Silver  time
series.
-    The forecasting period in the test dataset of this study, from 2020-01-03 to 2022-03-25,
covers  two  critical  global  events  that  significantly  affected  financial  markets.  First,  the
financial crisis during the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted all financial mar
## -
kets;  in  particular,  crude  oil  prices  plunged  in  April  2020.  Second,  the  Russia–Ukraine
conflict in February 2022 was associated with a sharp rise in crude oil, gold, and silver
prices. Therefore, the results of this study and the proposed models can be used during
financial crises and extreme global situations. Figure 5 shows the line chart of the WTI,
Brent, gold, and silver prices for reference.
## Methodology
LSTM and BiLSTM
LSTM  and  BiLSTM  are  structural  variants  of  RNN  models  that  can  remember  impor-
tant  information  from  time-series  sequences  (Lin  et  al.  2022).  In  particular,  BiLSTM
concatenates  two  LSTM  layers  in  opposite  directions.  The  interior  structure  of  a  com
## -
mon  LSTM  cell  is  shown  in  Fig. 1a.  An  LSTM  unit  consists  of  an  input  gate,  a  forget
gate, and an output gate. These gates facilitate information flow and help the cell forget
unnecessary  information.  First,  the  forgetting  gate  decides  what  information  from  the
inputs and previous hidden states to discard. Second, the input gate decides what infor
## -
mation from the inputs and previous cell states to keep and updates the cell state. Finally,
the output gate obtains the output
h
t
by multiplying the
o
t
of the input information pro-
cessed  by  the  sigmoid  activation  function  and  the  cell  state  vector  transformed  by  the
tanh activation function. The equations of a forward pass in an LSTM unit are as follows:
## (1)
f
t
=σW
f
x
t
## +U
f
h
t−1
## +b
f
## Table 1 (continued)
Method typeAuthor(s)Method(s)FeaturesData
## Financial
market
## Google
trend or
sentiment
WTIBrentGoldSilver
Vidal and
## Kristjanpoller
## (2020)
## CNN-LSTM✓✓
Orojo et al.
## (2019)
## MRN✓✓
Lin et al.
## (2022)
BiLSTM-
## Attention-
## CNN
## ✓✓✓

Page 10 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
where
x
t
## ∈R
d
is the input vector, and
h
t
## ∈R
h
is the hidden state vector. Furthermore,
f
t

is the forget gate vector,
i
t
is the input gate vector,
o
t
is the output gate vector,
c
t
## ′
is the tem-
porary  cell  state  vector,
c
t
## ∈R
h
cell  state  vector,  and
## W∈R
h×d
## ,U∈R
h×h
,andb∈R
h

represent the parameter matrices and vectors.
In  a  BiLSTM  model,  from  opposite  directions,
h
t
is  concatenated  to  construct  the  bidi-
rectional hidden state. The formulas of bidirectional
h
t
are as follows:
## (2)
i
t
## =σ
## (
## W
i
x
t
## +U
i
h
t−1
## +b
i
## )
## (3)
c
## ′
t
## =tanh
## (
## W
c
x
t
## +U
c
h
t−1
## +b
c
## )
## (4)
c
t
## =f
t
## ⊙c
t−1
## +i
t
## ⊙c
t
## ′
## (5)
o
t
## =σ
## (
## W
o
x
t
## +U
o
h
t−1
## +b
o
## )
## (6)
h
t
## =o
t
## ⊙tanh
## (
c
t
## )
## ,
## (7)
## �
h
t
## =LSTM
## (
x
t
## ,
## �
h
t−1
## )
Fig. 1 a LSTM internal cell structure, b GRU internal cell structure, c A single layer BiLSTM or BiGRU model

Page 11 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

GRU and BiGRU
Like  the  LSTM,  the  GRU  is  a  variant  of  RNN  cells  that  can  forget  insignificant  informa-
tion and help the model use longer data sequences. GRU has fewer parameters than LSTM
because it eliminates the output gate.
where
x
t
## ∈R
d
is  the  input  vector,  and
h
t
## ∈R
h
hidden  state  vector.  Additionally,
z
t

is  the  forget  gate  vector,
r
t
is  the  reset  gate  vector,
## ˆ
h
t
is  the  candidate  activation  vector,
## W∈R
h×d
## ,U∈R
h×h
,andb∈R
h
represent the parameter matrices and vectors, and
σ
is
the  sigmoid  activation  function.  For  certain  sequential  datasets,  GRUs  outperform  LSTM
models (Chung et al. 2014; Gruber and Jockisch 2020). The internal structure of the GRU
cell is depicted in Fig. 1b.
For  a  bidirectional  GRU  model,  hidden  state  vectors  from  two  opposite  directions  are
concatenated as follows:
Figure 1c  shows  the  architecture  of  a  single-layer  bidirectional  LSTM  (BiLSTM)  or
bidirectional GRU (BiGRU) model.
## CNN
A CNN is a FNN model proposed by Lecun et al. (1998). CNNs are very popular in com-
puter  vision  applications,  such  as  facial  recognition  systems,  object  localization,  object
detection,  and  semantic  segmentation.  CNNS  are  effective  at  capturing  local  patterns
and features within a time series. The convolutional layers learn filters to detect specific
## (8)
## ←
h
t
## =LSTM
## (
x
t
## ,
## ←
h
t+1
## )
## (9)
h
t
## =
## [
## �
h
t
## ,
## ←
h
t
## ]
## (10)
z
t
## =σ
## (
## W
z
x
t
## +U
z
h
t−1
## +b
z
## )
## (11)
r
t
## =σ
## (
## W
r
x
t
## +U
r
h
t−1
## +b
r
## )
## (12)
## ˆ
h
t
## =tanh
## (
## W
h
x
t
## +U
h
## (
r
t
## ⊙h
t−1
## )
## +b
h
## )
## (13)
h
t
## =z
t
## ⊙
## ˆ
h
t
## +
## (
## 1−z
t
## )
## ⊙h
t−1
## (14)
## �
h
t
## =GRU
## (
x
t
## ,
## �
h
t−1
## )
## (15)
## ←
h
t
## =GRU
## (
x
t
## ,
## ←
h
t+1
## )
## (16)
h
t
## =
## [
## �
h
t
## ,
## ←
h
t
## ]

Page 12 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
temporal patterns, making CNNs well suited for capturing local dependencies and short-
term  patterns  in  time-series  data.  CNNs  are  inherently  translation  invariant,  meaning
they  can  detect  patterns  regardless  of  their  position  in  the  input  sequence.  This  prop
## -
erty is helpful for time-series analysis because the same patterns may occur at different
time steps. The local perception and weight sharing of CNN can significantly reduce the
number of parameters, thus improving the efficiency of model learning (Lu et al. 2020);
however,  they  suffer  from  limitations  such  as  the  requirement  for  fixed-length  inputs,
lack of consideration of temporal ordering, and limited ability to detect long-term tem
## -
poral dependencies.
The architecture of this model is generally constructed from two layers: the convolu
## -
tion layer and the pooling layer. The convolution layer extracts useful features from the
input series by applying several convolution kernels to the inputs, as indicated in Eq. 17,
which downsamples the input for final forecasting. Then, a pooling layer is applied to the
output of the convolution layer to reduce the dimensionality of the model.
where
l
t
is the output of the convolution layer,
σ
is the activation function,
x
t
## ∈R
d
is the
input vector,
k
t
## ∈R
d
is the parameter vector of the convolution kernel, and
b
t
is the bias
term.
## TCN
The  intrinsic  weaknesses  of  CNN,  including  fixed-size  inputs  and  mismatched  input
and  output  dimensions,  restrict  its  application  in  time-series  forecasting.  The  TCN
(Lea et al. 2016) is a variant of the CNN that employs casual and dilated convolutions
appropriate  for  sequential  data  with  temporality  and  large  receptive  fields.  Causal
means  no  information  leakage  from  the  future  to  the  past,  and  the  receptive  field
means  the  set  of  sample  elements  of  the  original  input  that  affect  a  specific  element
of the output. A TCN model can show full coverage of the input history by setting a
proper  dilated  factor  and  kernel  size.  Furthermore,  the  TCN  has  a  simple  network
structure and outperforms standard recurrent networks, such as the RNN and LSTM
networks,  regarding  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  time-series  predictions  (Yan
et  al. 2020).  Figure 2  shows  a  general  representation  of  our  TCN  model  with  dilated
causal convolutions. This model’s architecture consists of the following.
Dilated  convolution  layer:  The  dilated  convolution  architecture  modifies  Kro
## -
necker-factored  convolutional  filters,  enabling  a  larger  receptive  field  with  fewer
parameters  and  layers  (Zhou  et  al.  2015).  For  a  sequence  of
x
t
## ∈R
d
and  a  filter
f:
## {
## 0,...,k−1
## }
## →R
,  the  dilated  convolution  operation
## ∗
## D
on  entries
s
of  the
sequence is defined as follows:
where
## D
is the dilation factor,
k
is the filter size, and
s−D.i
assures that only past data
are convoluted. A tanh function transforms the output of the dilated causal convolution
layer.
## (17)
l
t
## =σ
## (
x
t
## ∗k
t
## +b
t
## )
## (18)
## F
## (
s
## )
## =
## (
x
t
## ∗
## D
f
## )
## (
s
## )
## =
k−1
## ∑
i=1
f
## (
i
## )
## ·x
s−D.i

Page 13 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

Dropout layer: A dropout layer with a probability of 0.2 is applied after each dilated
convolution layer to regularize the model and eliminate the overfitting problem.
Residual  block:  We  used  a  stack  of  two  dilated  causal  convolution  layers  together,
and the results from the final convolution were added back to the inputs to obtain the
outputs of the block. The residual connection avoids the vanishing and/or exploding
gradient problem in deep-learning models.
Fully connected layer: The output of the residual block is then inputted into a fully
connected layer to predict the next-day price.
In Fig. 2, the TCN model has a stack of two layers, a residual connection, and a fully
connected  layer.  Each  layer  in  the  stack  has  a  dilated  causal  convolution,  a  tanh  acti
## -
vation  function,  and  a  dropout  for  regularization.  The  dilation  factors  for  the  dilated
convolution layer are
## D=1,2,4
and a filter size of
k=2
## .  When
## D=1
, the dilated con-
volution becomes a basic convolution.
In  recurrent-type  neural  networks,  operations  apply  sequentially.  In  contrast,  in  a
TCN  model,  all  sequences  are  convolved  simultaneously  in  each  dilated  convolutional
layer; hence, the training of TCN is much faster than in STM or GRU models (Lea et al.
## 2016).
Time2Vector (T2V‑BiLSTM and T2V‑BiGRU)
Time-series   input   can   be   considered   a   sequence   in   which   a   dependency   across
time  exists  among  the  sample  data  rather  than  being  identically  and  independently
Fig. 2 (left) The architecture of a TCN model with a stack of two dilated causal convolutional layers and a
residual connection. (right) a dilated causal convolution layer with dilated factos D = {1, 2, 4} and kernel size
k = 2

Page 14 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
distributed (i.i.d); therefore, it is essential to account for time features while developing
a time-series forecasting model. Vector embedding has been successfully used in many
NLP tasks (Pennington et al. 2014; Mikolov et al. 2013; Almeida and Xexéo 2019). Simi
## -
larly, Time2Vector (Kazemi et al. 2019) is a learnable vector embedding for time that can
be  easily  combined  with  many  deep-learning  models.  Time2Vector  is  a  decomposition
technique that encodes a temporal signal into periodic and nonperiodic patterns, allow
## -
ing the model to understand and learn from the time-dependent patterns. It eliminates
the  need  for  explicit  feature  engineering  when  dealing  with  time-related  features.  By
incorporating temporal information meaningfully, Time2Vector can improve the perfor
## -
mance of time-series models.
For  a  given  scalar  notion  of  time
τ
,  Time2Vec  of
τ
is  a  vector  of  size  k  +     1  defined  as
follows:
where
## T2V
## (
τ
## )
## [
i
## ]
is  the    i
th
element  of
## T2V
## (
τ
## )
## .
## F
is  a  periodic  activation  function,  and
w
and
b
are learnable weight and bias parameters, respectively. Following the indicated
activation function in the original T2V paper (Kazemi et al. 2019), we use a sine function
as
## F
. Time2Vector (T2V) assures that the time scale will not affect the learned periodic
and nonperiodic time features (Yang et al. 2021).
To construct the T2V-BiLSTM and T2V-BiGRU models, first, the input sequences are
transformed by Time2Vector embeddings, then the embedded input vectors are entered
into a single-layer BiLSTM or BiGRU model, and finally, the output is predicted through
a  fully  connected  layer.  Figure 3  presents  a  schematic  of  the  T2V-BiLSTM  or  T2V-
BiGRU  model.  Figure 4  summarizes  the  complete  data  preprocessing,  model  training,
and prediction process for this study’s test set.
Hybrid models
To verify the applicability of hybrid models in forecasting daily crude oil, gold, and silver
prices,  we  used  CNN-BiLSTM,  CNN-BiGRU,  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU  mod
## -
els.  CNNs  in  the  initial  layers  of  the  hybrid  model  can  learn  low-level  spatial  features,
such  as  local  patterns,  while  the  BiLSTM  layers  can  learn  high-level  temporal  depend
## -
encies.  This  hierarchical  representation  learning  allows  the  model  to  capture  local  and
global dependencies in the time-series data. CNNs and TCNs are well suited for feature
## (19)
## T2V
## (
τ
## )
## [
i
## ]
## =
## {
w
i
τ+b
i
## ,ifi=0.
## F
## (
w
i
τ+b
i
## )
## ,if1≤i≤k
## .
Fig. 3 T2V-BiLSTM or T2V-BiGRU models.
s
is the input sequence length,
k
is the T2V output size,
h
is the
recurrent hidden size

Page 15 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

extraction  from  raw  data,  including  time-series  data.  They  can  automatically  learn  rel-
evant  features  and  reduce  the  dimensionality  of  the  input,  which  can  be  beneficial  for
downstream  BiLSTM  or  BiGRU  layers  to  learn  more  meaningful  representations.  The
explanation of each model structure is as follows.
CNN-BiLSTM and CNN-BiGRU models: First, a one-dimensional convolution layer is
applied to input sequences in the CNN module. Then, a max pooling layer is applied to
the output of the convolution layer to extract the essential features. Next, the output of
the pooling layer is entered into a single-layer BiLSTM or BiGRU module, and the final
output is predicted through a fully connected layer.
TCN-BiLSTM  and  TCN-BiGRU  models:  First,  a  TCN  module  receives  the  input
sequences.  Next,  the  output  of  the  TCN  is  introduced  into  a  single-layer  BiLSTM  or
BiGRU module, and the final output is predicted through a fully connected layer.
Fig. 4 The price time-series forecasting flow chart

Page 16 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
Ensemble and machine‑learning models
This  study  uses  random  forest  and  LightGBM,  a  gradient-boosting  technique  among
the ensemble machine-learning models. Random forest generally provides high predic
## -
tion  accuracy  because  of  the  aggregation  of  multiple  decision  trees.  It  is  less  prone  to
overfitting  than  individual  decision  trees.  By  combining  multiple  trees  and  using  tech
## -
niques  such  as  bagging  and  random  feature  selection,  random  forest  reduces  variance
and  improves  the  model’s  generalization  ability.  It  is  also  robust  to  outliers  and  miss
## -
ing values; however, it lacks autocorrelation modeling because random forest treats each
data  point  independently  and  does  not  explicitly  consider  the  temporal  dependencies
between consecutive observations in the time series. Random forest is not well suited for
extrapolation, especially for long-term forecasts; thus, it may be difficult to capture and
project  future  trends  extending  beyond  the  observed  data  range.  While  random  forest
is generally robust to overfitting, it can still be sensitive to noisy data; it may overfit the
noise if the dataset contains a substantial amount of noise or irrelevant features, leading
to degraded performance.
LightGBM  is  a  powerful  and  efficient  gradient-boosting  framework  that  performs
excellently in various machine-learning tasks. LightGBM is highly efficient and can han
## -
dle large datasets with millions of instances and features. It uses a histogram-based algo-
rithm to achieve faster training and prediction times than traditional gradient-boosting
implementations.  The  main  advantage  of  LightGBM  is  low  memory  usage  due  to  the
use of a compact data structure for representing the dataset during training. Like other
gradient-boosting algorithms, LightGBM can be prone to overfitting if not properly reg
## -
ularized or tuned. LightGBM may struggle to capture complex feature interactions com-
pared with deep-learning models.
SVR  is  a  machine-learning  model  that  captures  linear  and  nonlinear  relationships
between  variables.  It  can  handle  high-dimensional  datasets  and  capture  complex  rela
## -
tionships  between  variables.  The  algorithm  focuses  on  the  support  vectors,  the  data
points that influence the model’s decision boundary most. Outliers have less impact on
this model because of the use of a margin. SVR allows using different kernel functions,
such  as  linear,  polynomial,  radial  basis  function,  and  sigmoid.  This  flexibility  enables
the  modeling  of  various  relationships  between  the  input  and  target  variables;  however,
SVR  performance  highly  depends  on  selecting  appropriate  hyperparameters,  such  as
kernel  type,  regularization  parameter,  and  kernel-specific  parameters.  Training  an  SVR
model can be computationally expensive, especially when dealing with large datasets or
complex kernel functions. SVR does not account for the temporal dependencies among
observations for time-series datasets.
KNN is an instance-based, nonparametric algorithm that uses different distance met
## -
rics, such as Euclidean distance, Manhattan distance, or cosine similarity, to make pre-
dictions.  The  KNN  does  not  explicitly  learn  a  model  from  the  training  data.  Instead,  it
stores the entire training dataset and uses it during prediction, eliminating the need for a
time-consuming training phase. As the number of training instances increases, the algo
## -
rithm’s prediction time can be significant because it requires calculating distances to all
training samples. Some limitations of KNN models are the curse of dimensionality, sen
## -
sitivity to the scale of features, intensive memory requirement, time-consuming predic-
tions with large datasets, and lack of capturing temporal dependencies.

Page 17 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

Evaluation criteria
This  study  adopts  the  following  three  metrics  to  calculate  the  forecasting  error  and
evaluate  the  prediction  performance:  MAE,  MAPE,  and  RMSE.  MAE  measures  the
difference between two continuous variables and calculates the mean value of all abso
## -
lute errors. MAPE is a scaleless error value that measures the relative forecasting error.
RMSE represents the standard deviation of the residual error between the predicted and
observed  values.  The  models’  prediction  performance  increases  with  decreasing  error
measures. The formula for the above evaluation criteria is as follows:
where
n
is the sample size, and
y
i
and
## ˆy
i
are the true and predicted values for sample
i
## ,
respectively.
Empirical analysis and results
Data description and preprocessing
The daily closing prices of WTI and Brent crude oil, gold, and silver were collected from
2000-01-04 to 2022-03-25 (Fig. 5). The original spot price data for WTI and Brent crude
oil  are  derived  from  the  US  Energy  Information  Administration  (https:// www. eia. gov),
while  the  spot  prices  of  gold  and  silver  are  from  KITCO  (https:// www. kitco. com).  We
used data from the same trading days across all four markets to obtain an identical sam
## -
ple size for all time series.
To  find  the  best  hyperparameters  and  evaluate  the  models’  real-world  performances,
evaluating  them  on  a  separate  validation  set  and  a  test  set  representing  future  unseen
data  is  essential.  Splitting  the  time-series  datasets  is  challenging  because  of  temporal
dependencies,  seasonality,  and  trends.  If  we  split  the  data  randomly,  it  breaks  the  tem
## -
poral  order,  and  the  model  may  be  trained  on  future  data,  leading  to  data  leakage  and
overfitting. Moreover, if the training set does not capture the full range of seasonality or
fails to include representative trend patterns, the model’s ability to generalize to unseen
data may be compromised. Ensuring the training set contains consecutive past observa
## -
tions  to  predict  future  observations,  includes  multiple  seasonal  cycles,  and  adequately
captures  the  underlying  trends  is  crucial.  Time-based  splitting  and  rolling  window
approaches can address these challenges in time-series analysis. In time-based splitting,
we split the data based on a specific date or time, ensuring that the training set only con
## -
tains past observations and the test set contains future observations. In the rolling win-
dow approach, a sliding window is used to create samples in the training, validation, and
test  sets,  where  each  sample  includes  past  observations  and  the  corresponding  future
## (20)
## MAE=
## 1
n
n
## ∑
i=1
## |ˆy
i
## −y
i
## |
## (21)
## MAPE=
## 100
n
n
## ∑
i=1
## ∣
## ∣
## ∣
## ∣
## ˆy
i
## −y
i
y
i
## ∣
## ∣
## ∣
## ∣
## (22)
## RMSE=
## √
## √
## √
## √
## 1
n
n
## ∑
i=1
## (
## ˆy
i
## −y
i
## )
## 2

Page 18 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
target observation. Thus, for each market, the entire dataset is split into three parts: 65%
training data (from 2000-01-04 to 2014-06-15), 25% validation data (from 2014-06-16 to
2020-01-02),  and  10%  test  data  (from  2020-01-03  to  2022-03-25).  The  test  data  period
includes  the  financial  crisis  due  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  sharp  decline  in
crude  oil  prices  in  April  2020.  Therefore,  test  data  include  highly  volatile  price  data,
making forecasting even more challenging.
Since deep-learning models are sensitive to the scale of data, we normalized each data
## -
set  into  [0,1]  intervals  to  limit  the  effect  of  noise,  speed  up  the  updating  of  neural  net-
work  parameters,  and  enhance  the  training  performance  of  the  model.  The  formula  to
standardize the data is as follows:
where
x
t
and
x
t
## ′
denote  the  data  before  and  after  standardization,  respectively.  Table 2
summarizes  the  sample’s  descriptive  statistics  and  statistical  tests  for  WTI  and  Brent
crude  oil,  gold,  and  silver.  The  total  sample  size  for  all  markets  is  5426.  All  four  mar
## -
ket spot prices show significant characteristics of skewness, while WTI, Brent, and gold
also represent significant leptokurtic properties at a 5% significance level. Furthermore,
the  significant  Jarque–Bera  test  statistics  at  a  1%  significance  level  show  that  the  WTI,
Brent,  gold,  and  silver  price  time  series  do  not  comply  with  the  normal  distribution;
hence, these markets can be treated as nonstationary signals.
For these forecasting tasks,
x
t
## =
## {
x
## 1
## ,x
## 2
## ,...,x
s
## }
is the input vector, where
x
i
is the price
data at day
i
and
s
is the sequence length (sliding window length), and
y
t
## =
## {
x
s+1
## }
is the
target. We created inputs for different sequences before sending a series into the model.
In this study, we train 16 deep- and machine-learning models with four different sliding
window lengths of 5, 30, 60, and 90 days to predict the next-day WTI, Brent, gold, and
silver prices. We have considered 5 as a relatively short sliding window length and 30, 60,
and 90 as relatively long to capture any seasonality or trend in the data. We will compare
deep-  and  machine-learning  models  to  determine  how  they  forecast  commodity  price
time series with longer input sequences.
## (23)
x
## ′
t
## =
x
t
## −min
## (
x
t
## )
max
## (
x
t
## )
## −
min
## (
x
t
## )
Fig. 5 WTI, and Brent crude oil, Gold and Silver price movements from 2000-01-04 to 2022-03-25

Page 19 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

Empirical results
Crude oil and precious metals are essential commodities in financial markets. This study
aims  to  forecast  the  daily  price  of  WTI  and  Brent  crude  oil,  gold,  and  silver  through
deep-learning models and compare the prediction performance of deep-learning models
with  random  forest,  LightGBM,  SVR,  and  KNN  models  as  baseline  machine-learning
models,  hence,  our  results  indicate  the  best  deep-learning  model  for  forecasting  crude
oil, gold, and silver daily prices. We will experiment with the performance of all models
across four sliding window lengths of 5, 30, 60, and 90 days to indicate the suitable input
length for superior performance with each model. The deep-learning models used in this
study  are  LSTM,  BiLSTM,  GRU,  BiGRU,  T2V-BiLSTM,  T2V-BiGRU,  CNN,  CNN-BiL
## -
STM, CNN-BiGRU, TCN, TCN-BiLSTM, and TCN-BiGRU models.
We used grid search on the validation dataset to tune and select the optimal hyperpa
## -
rameters of each model. The common hyperparameters among all models are the num-
ber of epochs, batch size, dropout rate, and learning rate, equal to 50, 32, 0.2, and 0.001,
respectively.  Table 3  presents  the  selected  hyperparameters  of  four  best-performing
models  in  this  study.  Due  to  the  large  scale  of  the  study  and  space  limitations,  we  only
presented  the  selected  hyperparameters  of  BiGRU,  T2-BiGRU,  TCN,  and  TCN-BiGRU
models  for  each  market.  The  hyperparameters  of  the  other  models  are  available  upon
request from the corresponding author.
After each training step, the weights of the models are updated by the Adam optimizer
with a scheduled learning rate (lr) as follows:
The initial learning rate (
lr
## 0
) is 0.001, applied from epoch one through epoch five, and
then  exponentially  decreases  for  each  epoch  after  epoch  five.  In  this  study,  the  models
were trained to minimize the MSE loss function. The objective function of the training
process is as follows:
## (24)
lr=
## {
lr
## 0
ifepochs<5
lr∗e
## (
## −0.1
## )
otherwise
## .
Table 2 Descriptive statistics
a

## 1
Null hypothesis is that the series are not skewed
b
Null hypothesis is that the series show normal kurtosis
c
Null hypothesis is that the series are not normally distributed
*, ** denote the rejection of the null hypothesis at the 1% and 5% significance level, respectively
IndexWTIBrentGoldSilver
## Count5426542654265426
## Mean61.4764.271020.9815.73
Standard deviation25.7929.33510.858.51
## Min− 36.989.12255.954.07
## Max145.31143.952067.1548.7
## Skewness
a
## 0.39*0.41*− 0.07**0.61*
## Kurtosis
b
## − 0.598*− 0.817*− 1.249*0.084
Jarque-Bera
c
## 218.903*301.375*357.452*342.924*

Page 20 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
## Table 3

Selected hyperparameters of models
Other common hyperparameters among all models and all four markets are: epochs
## =

50, batch size
## =

32, dropout rate
## =

0.2, and initial learning rate
## =
## 0.001
## Models
## Markets
Hidden size
T2V size
Num. filters
Kernel size
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
BiGRU
## WTI
## 64
## 128
## 128
## 128
## Brent
## 64
## 128
## 128
## 128
## Gold
## 128
## 128
## 128
## 128
## Silver
## 64
## 128
## 128
## 128
T2V-BiGRU
## WTI
## 64
## 128
## 128
## 128
## 32
## 90
## 32
## 128
## Brent
## 64
## 128
## 150
## 128
## 64
## 128
## 128
## 128
## Gold
## 128
## 150
## 128
## 128
## 90
## 64
## 128
## 128
## Silver
## 256
## 256
## 256
## 128
## 128
## 128
## 128
## 32
## TCN
## WTI
## 32
## 16
## 16
## 16
## 2
## 4
## 2
## 4
## Brent
## 32
## 16
## 16
## 16
## 2
## 4
## 2
## 4
## Gold
## 64
## 64
## 64
## 32
## 2
## 16
## 4
## 4
## Silver
## 32
## 64
## 64
## 64
## 2
## 4
## 2
## 4
TCN-BiGRU
## WTI
## 64
## 64
## 64
## 64
## 32
## 16
## 16
## 16
## 2
## 4
## 2
## 4
## Brent
## 64
## 64
## 64
## 64
## 32
## 16
## 16
## 16
## 2
## 4
## 2
## 4
## Gold
## 128
## 128
## 128
## 128
## 64
## 64
## 64
## 32
## 2
## 16
## 16
## 4
## Silver
## 64
## 128
## 64
## 128
## 32
## 64
## 64
## 32
## 2
## 16
## 4
## 4

Page 21 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

where
## ˆy
i
is the predicted price, and
y
i
is the true target price for sample
i
## .
Overfitting  in  financial  market  price  forecasting  experiments  can  lead  to  misleading
and unreliable results. Overfitting occurs when a model is too complex and can capture
the  noise  in  the  data  rather  than  the  underlying  patterns.  The  consequences  of  overfit
## -
ting in financial market price forecasting can be severe. Traders reliant on the overfilled
model may make poor investment decisions, leading to significant losses. Furthermore,
the overfilled model may be susceptible to market changes, making it difficult to use in
real-world situations. Techniques such as cross-validation, dropout, early stopping, and
pruning (for random forest and LightGBM) are employed to mitigate the risk of overfit
## -
ting in crude oil and precious metals market price forecasting. Cross-validation involves
partitioning  the  data  into  training  and  validation  sets  and  evaluating  the  model  on  the
validation  set  to  assess  its  generalization  performance.  Model  regularization  in  this
study is achieved through a dropout layer in the models’ architectures and early stopping
after 10 epochs during training. Early stopping will end the training process if the valida
## -
tion error does not improve. To further assure the robustness of the forecasting results,
all  reported  errors  and  predicted  values  are  the  average  outputs  from  10  runs  of  each
model.
All  deep-learning  models  are  implemented  using  Tensorflow  Keras,  and  machine-
learning  models  are  created  using  Sklearn.  The  experiments  were  conducted  using
Python  3.8  and  run  on  a  computing  system  with  a  70  W  Tesla  T4  NVIDIA-SMI  GPU,
CUDA version 11.2, and 16 GB RAM.
WTI price forecasting
To show the computational performance of our deep-learning models for WTI next-day
spot  price  forecasting,  we  draw  the  forecasting  performance  of  LSTM,  BiLSTM,  GRU,
BiGRU,  T2V-BiLSTM,  T2V-BiGRU,  CNN,  CNN-BiLSTM,  CNN-BiGRU,  TCN,  TCN-
BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU  models,  which  we  compare  with  the  baseline  models,  i.e.,
random  forest,  LightGBM,  KNN,  and  SVR  models.  Each  model  was  executed  10  times
to  reduce  randomness  and  improve  the  robustness  of  the  results.  Table 4  presents  the
MAE, MAPE, and RMSE values for the forecasted next-day WTI prices in the test data
## -
set across all models. Among the evaluated models and considering two out of three per-
formance criteria, the TCN model consistently achieves the lowest MAE and MAPE for
WTI price forecasting across all input sliding window sizes. However, when considering
the RMSE metric, the BiGRU model outperforms the other models for input sequences
of  lengths  5  and  30.  Conversely,  for  input  sequences  of  lengths  60  and  90,  the  TCN-
BiGRU  and  T2V-BiGRU  models  demonstrate  superior  performance,  respectively.  In
addition to the superior prediction performance, the forecasting error of the TCN model
is  not  significantly  affected  by  the  input  sequence  length,  as  we  obtain  MAE  values  of
1.510,  1.455,  1.444,  and  1.472  with  sequence  lengths  of  5,  30,  60,  and  90,  respectively.
Comparing this with other models, we can see that most models’ performance is more
sensitive  to  the  input  sequence  length.  Using  bidirectional  models  has  proved  effective
## (25)
Objectivefunction=MinimizeMSE=Minimize
## 1
n
n
## ∑
i=1
## (
## ˆy
i
## −y
i
## )
## 2

Page 22 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
## Table 4

WTI price forecasting performance
To assure the robustness of models’ performances, the average of errors in ten runs of the models are reported here. Bold indicates the lowest valueModels
## MAE
## MAPE
## RMSE
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## LSTM
## 1.950
## 1.872
## 1.875
## 1.873
## 7.190
## 8.005
## 8.605
## 8.284
## 3.787
## 3.719
## 3.720
## 3.720
## GRU
## 1.893
## 1.787
## 1.765
## 1.631
## 8.300
## 6.092
## 5.672
## 4.965
## 3.682
## 3.584
## 3.580
## 3.539
BiLSTM
## 1.821
## 1.654
## 1.679
## 1.904
## 7.532
## 5.966
## 5.720
## 5.286
## 3.588
## 3.511
## 3.496
## 3.747
BiGRU
## 1.570
## 1.559
## 1.575
## 1.699
## 6.868
## 5.094
## 5.230
## 6.725
## 3.415
## 3.432
## 3.439
## 3.488
T2V-BiLSTM
## 1.985
## 2.196
## 1.668
## 1.670
## 5.594
## 5.033
## 6.274
## 6.204
## 3.770
## 3.986
## 3.461
## 3.458
T2V-BiGRU
## 1.889
## 1.606
## 1.511
## 1.523
## 5.107
## 5.987
## 3.853
## 5.060
## 3.691
## 3.451
## 3.392
## 3.405
## CNN
## 1.887
## 2.068
## 3.201
## 3.201
## 7.277
## 8.213
## 8.957
## 9.357
## 4.000
## 6.064
## 5.085
## 5.071
CNN-BiLSTM
## 1.972
## 2.581
## 2.563
## 3.650
## 6.733
## 6.158
## 6.566
## 8.207
## 4.496
## 4.845
## 4.444
## 5.695
CNN-BiGRU
## 1.851
## 2.406
## 2.244
## 2.885
## 8.133
## 5.850
## 7.793
## 7.196
## 4.243
## 4.650
## 4.161
## 4.815
## TCN
## 1.510
## 1.455
## 1.444
## 1.472
## 3.829
## 3.663
## 3.530
## 3.882
## 3.550
## 3.495
## 3.559
## 3.552
TCN-BiLSTM
## 2.063
## 2.354
## 1.704
## 2.494
## 5.374
## 5.566
## 4.301
## 5.377
## 3.857
## 4.267
## 3.419
## 4.456
TCN-BiGRU
## 1.787
## 2.015
## 1.672
## 1.911
## 5.437
## 5.471
## 7.023
## 5.033
## 3.520
## 3.872
## 3.372
## 3.720
## Random Forest
## 3.209
## 3.151
## 1.887
## 1.868
## 7.209
## 7.131
## 4.307
## 4.286
## 4.869
## 4.801
## 3.574
## 3.569
LightGBM
## 1.487
## 1.551
## 1.554
## 1.558
## 3.490
## 3.622
## 3.624
## 3.643
## 3.213
## 3.338
## 3.392
## 3.386
## SVR
## 2.231
## 4.199
## 3.861
## 5.586
## 5.591
## 9.224
## 8.560
## 16.124
## 4.947
## 5.733
## 5.687
## 7.821
## KNN
## 1.772
## 3.358
## 5.049
## 6.559
## 4.075
## 7.599
## 10.681
## 12.830
## 3.440
## 5.586
## 7.792
## 10.028

Page 23 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

in  NLP  tasks  (Arbane  et  al.  2023;  Huang  et  al.  2023;  G.  Liu  and  Guo  2019;  Raza  and
Schwartz 2023);  however,  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  using  these  models  for  price
time-series  forecasting.  In  this  study,  all  three  performance  criteria  from  Table 4  show
that  bidirectional  recurrent  models,  such  as  BiLSTM  and  BiGRU,  perform  better  than
unidirectional  models,  such  as  LSTM  and  GRU,  for  all  sequence  lengths.  Bidirectional
RNNs exploit the network memory to process information from backward and forward
directions. Therefore, interdependency among data samples is learned better compared
to  unidirectional  models  that  only  use  forward-direction  information  processing.  Our
findings comply with Yang and Wang (2022) and Siami-Namini et al. (2019), who found
that the BiLSTM model outperformed the LSTM model for time-series prediction. Fur
## -
thermore, it is evident from Table 4 that GRU-type models such as GRU, BiGRU, T2V-
BiGRU,  CNN-BiGRU,  and  TCN-BiGRU  perform  better  than  LSTM-type  models  such
as  LSTM,  Bi  LSTM,  T2V-Bi  LSTM,  CNN-Bi  LSTM,  and  TCN-Bi  LSTM  in  WTI  price
forecasting.
To evaluate the effectiveness of Time2Vector embedding in WTI price forecasting, we
compare the MAE, MAPE, and RMSE of the BiLSTM and BiGRU models with those of
the  T2V-BiLSTM  and  T2V-BiGRU  models,  respectively.  Using  the  T2V  input  embed
## -
ding, the MAE of the BiLSTM and BiGRU models with input sequence 5 increases from
1.821  and  1.570  to  1.985  and  1.889,  respectively.  In  contrast,  the  MAE  of  the  BiLSTM
and  BiGRU  models  with  input  sequence  90  decreases  from  1.904  and  1.699  to  1.670
and  1.523,  respectively.  Arguably,  Time2Vector  embedding  does  not  improve  forecast
## -
ing with smaller input sequences, 5 and 30, while it improves the WTI price forecasting
performance for longer sequences of 60 and 90. To study the impact of hybrid models,
such  as  CNN-BiLSTM  and  CNN-BiGRU,  we  compared  their  performance  with  single
BiLSTM  and  BiGRU  models.  Combining  the  CNN  model  with  recurrent-type  models
has a detrimental effect on the forecasting performance of WTI prices, as evidenced by
an increase in MAE across all sequence lengths. This outcome occurs because the CNN
module downsamples the input sequence, and some information that might be useful for
BiLSTM or BiGRU models will be lost, resulting in higher forecasting errors. Similarly, a
single TCN model outperforms the hybrid TCN-BiLSTM and TCN-BiGRU models. The
TCN model can see the entire sequence in its receptive field and use the best temporal
features to forecast the WTI price; therefore, combining it with a recurrent-type model
will only increase the complexity of the model and cause an overfitting problem without
significant improvements in forecasting performance.
Upon  examining  the  forecasting  errors  of  ensemble  tree-based  models,  i.e.,  random
forest and LightGBM, it becomes clear that random forest performs poorly in predicting
WTI  prices,  whereas  LightGBM  demonstrates  exceptional  forecasting  capabilities.  The
MAPE and RMSE values of LightGBM across sequence lengths of 5, 30, and 90 days are
consistently  the  lowest  among  all  16  forecasting  models.  Consequently,  LightGBM  can
be considered an approximate match to the TCN model as the top-performing method
for  WTI  price  forecasting.  Moreover,  the  performance  of  LightGBM  exhibits  a  slight
decline  as  the  input  sequence  lengths  increase;  however,  this  decrease  in  performance
is  not  significant,  indicating  that  LightGBM  is  relatively  insensitive  to  variations  in  the
input  sequence  length.  Conversely,  using  the  SVR  and  KNN  models,  it  becomes  clear
that  the  performance  of  conventional  machine-learning  models  tends  to  deteriorate  as

Page 24 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
the  input  sequences  grow.  In  contrast,  deep-learning  models  are  less  affected  by  larger
input sequences, demonstrating their robustness. All deep-learning models outperform
the  SVR  and  KNN  models  for  larger  input  sequences;  however,  for  smaller  sequences,
such  as  those  with  a  length  of  5,  the  KNN  model  performs  better  than  the  deep-learn
## -
ing models, except for the BiGRU and TCN models. This discrepancy can be attributed
to  the  data  within  each  sequence  serving  as  input  features  for  the  KNN  model.  As  the
sequence  length  increases,  the  KNN  model  faces  greater  challenges  in  identifying  the
nearest neighbors required for accurately predicting the target price.
Figure 6  presents  the  RMSE  for  the  WTI  next-day  spot  price  forecasting  models  to
find  the  best  sliding  window  length  for  each  forecasting  model.  Our  experiments  with
WTI  price  forecasting  show  that  using  only  recurrent-type  models  such  as  LSTM,
GRU,  BiLSTM,  BiGRU,  T2V-BiLSTM,  and  T2V-BiGRU,  we  obtain  better  prediction
performance  compared  with  using  only  CNN  or  a  hybrid  of  CNN  with  Recurrent-type
models  such  as  CNN-BiLSTM  and  CNN-BiGRU.  Recurrent-type  models  are  not  very
sensitive  to  the  input  sequence  length,  and  they  even  perform  slightly  better  with  rela
## -
tively longer input sequences because longer sequences enable the model to learn more
upward,  downward,  and  complex  patterns  and  generalize  better  in  predicting  unseen
data.  Nonetheless,  since  the  CNN  models  cannot  memorize  important  information
from past data points, the forecasting error of CNN-type models, such as a single CNN,
CNN-BiLSTM, and CNN-BiGRU, increases with the input sequence length. The RMSE
of TCN-BiLSTM and TCN-BiGRU is generally smaller than the RMSE of CNN-BiLSTM
and CNN-BiGRU models; therefore, we can conclude that among the hybrid models, the
TCN module performs better than the CNN module in extracting the essential temporal
features. Figure 6 shows that the input sequence of 60 days of lagged data points is gen
## -
erally  better  than  other  sliding  window  lengths  such  as  5,  30,  or  90  days  for  WTI  daily
price forecasting; however, the CNN, CNN-BiLSTM, and CNN-BiGRU models perform
better with an input sequence of 5 days than the other sequence lengths for WTI price
prediction.  Among  the  machine-learning  models,  Ensemble  tree-based  models  emerge
as  the  leading  models  for  forecasting  WTI  prices.  Notably,  the  random  forest  model
exhibits subpar performance with shorter input sequences. LightGBM consistently per
## -
forms well across all input sequences, demonstrating its robust forecasting capabilities.
## 0
## 1
## 2
## 3
## 4
## 5
## 6
## 7
## 8
## 9
## 10
Root Mean Square Error (WTI
## )
## RMSE-5
## RMSE-30
## RMSE-60
## RMSE-90
Fig. 6 RMSE of WTI crude oil next-day price forecasting models

Page 25 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

In contrast, the forecasting performance of the SVR and KNN models deteriorates as the
input sequence length increases, suggesting that these models struggle to capture com
## -
plex patterns and relationships effectively within longer data sequences.
Our  observations  regarding  WTI  forecasting  align  with  Qin  et  al.  (2023),  where  the
GRU  model  demonstrated  superior  performance  compared  with  random  forest,  SVR,
and  LSTM  models,  achieving  a  lower  MAPE  value.  Similarly,  our  results  corroborate
with J. Yuan et al. (2023), highlighting that LightGBM exhibited significantly better per
## -
formance than the LSTM and SVR models.
Figure 7 compares the line chart of predicted WTI prices in the test dataset with the
actual WTI price value from 2020-01-03 to 2022-03-25. The predicted values at the end
of April 2020 indicate that the TCN model surpasses the LightGBM model in accurately
capturing sharp changes in the WTI price. The TCN model demonstrates superior per
## -
formance  in  detecting  and  predicting  abrupt  fluctuations  in  price,  showcasing  its  abil-
ity  to  capture  and  respond  to  sudden  market  dynamics  with  greater  precision  than  the
LightGBM model.
Brent price forecasting
Table 5 shows the errors, MAE, MAPE, and RMSE, of our forecasting models for Brent
next-day spot price forecasting. We compared the forecasting performance of the LSTM,
BiLSTM, GRU, BiGRU, T2V-BiLSTM, T2V-BiGRU, CNN, CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-BiGRU,
TCN,  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU  models  with  the  baseline  models,  random  for
## -
est, LightGBM, KNN, and SVR models. According to the lowest values of the MAE and
RMSE  measures  for  all  input  sequence  lengths,  5,  30,  60,  and  90,  the  TCN  is  the  best-
performing  model  in  predicting  the  Brent  crude  oil  price  in  the  test  dataset.  Consider
## -
ing  the  MAPE  for  input  sequences  with  5  lagged  data  points,  the  TCN  model  has  the
best Brent price prediction performance; for input sequences of lengths 30, 60, and 90,
the T2V-BiGRU model outperforms other models. Furthermore, the TCN model is not
particularly sensitive to the input sequence length. The TCN achieves a robust and sta
## -
ble  forecasting  performance  for  all  input  sequence  lengths  as  the  MAE  with  5,  30,  60,
and  90  sequences  are  1.295,  1.353,  1.315,  and  1.301,  respectively.  The  performance  of
most  other  models  exhibits  higher  sensitivity  to  changes  in  the  input  sequence  length
Fig. 7 Comparison of WTI crude oil price forecasting models on the test dataset

Page 26 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
for  Brent  crude  oil.  For  instance,  the  MAEs  of  the  CNN  model  grow  with  increasing
sequence  length  as  it  obtains  MAEs  of  1.542,  1.879,  2.818,  and  5.194  with  sequence
lengths of 5, 30, 60, and 90, respectively. Similar to our findings for WTI crude oil price
forecasting,  we  found  that  BiLSTM  and  BiGRU  models  generally  outperform  unidirec
## -
tional LSTM and GRU models in forecasting Brent crude oil prices. By juxtaposing the
MAE,  MAPE,  and  RMSE  of  the  GRU-type  models  (such  as  GRU,  BiGRU,  T2V-BiGRU,
CNN-BiGRU,  and  TCN-BiGRU)  with  those  of  the  LSTM-type  models  (such  as  LSTM,
BiLSTM, T2V-BiLSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, and TCN-BiLSTM) we found that a GRU unit is
a more appropriate recurrent unit for Brent crude oil price forecasting.
The impact of Time2Vector embedding in Brent crude oil price forecasting is assessed
by comparing the MAE, MAPE, and RMSE of the T2V-BiLSTM and T2V-BiGRU mod
## -
els with the BiLSTM and BiGRU models, respectively. Table 5 shows that T2V embed-
ding improves the forecasting performance of the BiLSTM model for input sequences of
60 and 90 while it stimulates the performance of the BiGRU model for input sequences
of  30,  60,  and  90.  The  results  of  Brent  crude  oil  price  forecasting  confirm  that  T2V
embedding favorably influences forecasting with longer input sequences. For the hybrid
models, our results indicate that combining the CNN model with recurrent-type models
adversely  affects  the  performance  of  the  BiLSTM  and  BiGRU  models  for  Brent  crude
oil price forecasting. The same pattern appears when comparing the forecasting perfor
## -
mance of a single TCN model with the TCN-BiLSTM and TCN-BiGRU hybrid models
in predicting Brent daily prices. The TCN model outperforms the hybrid models.
Comparing  the  forecasting  errors  of  the  random  forest,  LightGBN,  SVR,  and  KNN
models  with  our  deep-learning  models  indicates  that  the  forecasting  performance
of  deep-learning  models  is  superior  to  that  of  machine-learning  models.  However,
the  ensemble  LightGBM  model  stands  as  an  exception,  demonstrating  remarkable
Table 5 Brent price forecasting performance
To assure the robustness of models’ performances, the average of errors in ten runs of the models are reported here. Bold
indicates the lowest value
ModelsMAEMAPERMSE
## 530609053060905306090
## LSTM1.8561.8061.7891.8213.6893.5633.5093.6302.8602.8262.8002.830
## GRU 1.7601.7211.4361.4123.3433.2772.7522.7152.7602.6702.2892.257
BiLSTM1.7031.4921.5561.5623.3282.8952.9743.0132.6432.3642.4462.449
BiGRU 1.4211.4281.4391.4252.8882.8612.8952.8332.2222.2172.2372.228
T2V-BiLSTM1.8931.5031.4171.4033.7382.9222.7882.6832.9222.3712.2112.200
T2V-BiGRU 1.7211.3861.3721.4033.3452.6692.6412.6712.6712.1892.1712.204
## CNN1.5421.8792.8185.1942.6533.6795.7735.1502.4592.9344.3354.032
CNN-BiLSTM1.8572.4562.6802.6413.6184.8875.2415.1212.8443.8074.1264.096
CNN-BiGRU 1.7692.4142.2652.2792.1365.0264.6844.2332.7473.6943.4783.248
## TCN1.2951.3531.3151.3012.6372.9052.6582.6972.0352.0592.0522.045
TCN-BiLSTM2.0632.3201.6531.8794.0624.6203.2153.5923.1713.6582.4672.923
TCN-BiGRU 1.7682.0351.3632.0613.4404.0612.6394.1212.7463.2362.1293.217
## Random Forest1.9892.6812.7172.6673.8115.4255.4755.2752.9093.5853.5653.501
LightGBM1.3751.4261.45251.4782.7192.9102.9633.0632.1302.1742.1902.210
## SVR2.1302.7874.4804.5304.6855.1929.3438.4173.2844.1026.2846.448
## KNN1.5943.2245.4406.4213.1976.73710.7212.942.4834.9848.37910.14

Page 27 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

performance as the second-best model among all 16 models for forecasting Brent crude
oil  prices  across  all  input  sequence  lengths.  This  exceptional  performance  sets  Light
## -
GBM  apart  from  the  other  models,  emphasizing  its  robustness  and  effectiveness  in
accurately  predicting  Brent  crude  oil  prices,  regardless  of  the  input  sequence  length;
however,  for  the  short  sequence  length  of  5,  the  KNN  performs  better  than  the  deep-
learning models, except for the BiGRU, CNN, and TCN models.
Figure 8 represents the RMSE of the forecasting models implemented in this study to
predict  the  next-day  Brent  crude  oil  price  in  the  test  dataset.  Our  results  denote  that
the  recurrent-type  models  such  as  LSTM,  GRU,  BiLSTM,  BiGRU,  T2V-BiLSTM,  and
T2V-BiGRU  outperform  the  CNN  and  hybrid  models  such  as  CNN-BiLSTM,  CNN-
BiGRU,  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU  in  terms  of  Brent  price  forecasting.  Figure 8
shows  that,  in  general,  the  efficacity  of  recurrent-type  models  in  predicting  the  Brent
price is enhanced with relatively longer input sequences; however, the CNN and hybrid
models  do  not  perform  well  with  longer  input  sequences.  The  RMSE  of  TCN-BiLSTM
and  TCN-BiGRU  are  mainly  lower  than  the  RMSE  of  CNN-BiLSTM  and  CNN-BiGRU
models;  therefore,  we  can  infer  that  the  TCN  module  performs  better  than  the  CNN
module  in  extracting  the  critical  temporal  features  of  Brent  crude  oil  price.  Examin
## -
ing  the  ensemble  and  conventional  machine-learning  models,  namely  random  forest,
LightGBM,  SVR,  and  KNN,  indicates  that  the  optimal  forecasting  input  sequence  for
Brent  price  prediction  is  five  days.  The  LightGBM  model  achieves  superior  forecasting
across all input sequences and, thus, is not significantly affected by changes in the input
sequence  length.  As  a  general  observation,  the  forecasting  performance  of  these  base
## -
line models declines as the input sequence length increases, which indicates that shorter
input  sequences  provide  more  accurate  and  reliable  predictions  than  longer  sequences
when using these models for forecasting Brent prices. Regardless of the machine learn
## -
ing–type  models,  CNN,  CNN-BiLSTM,  and  CNN-BiGRU  models  that  perform  better
with  shorter  input  sequences,  our  experiments  indicates  that  the  best  input  sequence
length  for  Brent  crude  oil  forecasting  is  60  days  of  past  data.  Hence,  the  lowest  RMSE
values  across  most  of  the  deep-learning  models  in  this  study  are  achieved  for  an  input
sequence length of 60 for Brent crude oil price forecasting.
## 0
## 2
## 4
## 6
## 8
## 10
Root Mean Square Error (Brent
## )
## RMSE-5
## RMSE-30
## RMSE-60
## RMSE-90
Fig. 8 RMSE of Brent next-day price forecasting models

Page 28 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
Our results validate the conclusions drawn by Zhao et al. (2017), indicating that deep-
learning  models  outperform  machine-learning  models,  such  as  SVR,  in  forecasting
crude oil prices. Figure 9 compares the line chart of predicted Brent crude oil prices in
the test dataset with the actual Brent price values from 2020-01-03 to 2022-03-25. Ana
## -
lyzing the predicted value during the abrupt Brent price change periods shows that the
TCN  model  outperforms  the  LightGBM  model  in  accurately  capturing  sharp  changes
in Brent price. Thus, TCN is a more reliable model for predicting the sudden changes in
Brent price.
Gold price forecasting
Table 6  presents  the  forecasting  errors  of  gold  price  prediction  with  16  deep-  and
machine-learning  models.  Considering  the  models’  resulting  MAE,  MAPE,  and  RMSE,
the  TCN  model  has  the  best  gold  price  prediction  performance  for  input  sequences  of
5 and 90 days. Moreover, for gold price predictions with input sequences of 30 and 60,
the BiGRU and GRU models show superior performance. Our results show that in most
cases, the deep-learning models performed remarkably better than the baseline random
forest,  LightGBM,  SVR,  and  KNN  models  in  predicting  the  price  of  gold.  Compared
with  CNN-BiLSTM,  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU,  the  SVR  model  achieved  lower
MAE,  MAPE,  and  RMSE  values.  The  prediction  with  gold  price  data  shows  that  bidi
## -
rectional  LSTM  models  perform  better  than  unidirectional  LSTM  models  for  all  input
sequences. Meanwhile, the BiGRU model outperformed the GRU model exclusively for
input  sequences  of  5  and  60  days.  Comparing  the  gold  price  forecasting  errors  of  the
GRU-type  models,  such  as  GRU,  BiGRU,  T2V-BiGRU,  CNN-BiGRU,  and  TCN-BiGRU,
with those of the LSTM-type models, such as LSTM, Bi LSTM, T2V-Bi LSTM, CNN-Bi
LSTM,  and  TCN-Bi  LSTM,  we  found  that  the  GRU-type  models  are  more  appropriate
than the LSTM-type models for gold price forecasting.
Figure 5  shows  that  the  dynamics  of  gold  price  movement  from  2000-01-04  to  2022-
03-25 differs from the WTI and Brent crude oil markets, and an upward trend is visible
in Gold price movements throughout the time. Nevertheless, our deep-learning models
could  predict  the  gold  price  for  the  test  data  relatively  well.  In  contrast  to  its  perfor
## -
mance  in  WTI  and  Brent  price  forecasting,  the  LightGBM  model  surprisingly  did  not
Fig. 9 Comparison of Brent crude oil price forecasting models on the test dataset

Page 29 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

## Table 6

Gold price forecasting performance
To assure the robustness of models’ performances, the average of errors in ten runs of the models are reported here. Bold indicates the lowest valueModels
## MAE
## MAPE
## RMSE
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## 5
## 30
## 60
## 90
## LSTM
## 26.922
## 29.530
## 33.946
## 35.389
## 1.516
## 1.667
## 1.921
## 2.003
## 33.259
## 35.913
## 40.370
## 41.671
## GRU
## 18.212
## 17.169
## 21.505
## 24.501
## 1.007
## 0.950
## 1.204
## 1.347
## 25.262
## 23.364
## 28.569
## 32.884
BiLSTM
## 22.332
## 26.169
## 32.760
## 36.389
## 1.252
## 1.477
## 1.849
## 2.052
## 29.257
## 33.659
## 42.267
## 42.411
BiGRU
## 19.067
## 15.188
## 27.635
## 22.148
## 1.051
## 0.847
## 1.559
## 1.217
## 26.132
## 20.846
## 35.118
## 28.840
T2V-BiLSTM
## 25.081
## 33.579
## 36.574
## 32.406
## 1.411
## 1.895
## 2.054
## 1.810
## 31.366
## 42.016
## 45.554
## 69.549
T2V-BiGRU
## 19.931
## 24.353
## 24.487
## 35.058
## 1.108
## 1.362
## 1.385
## 1.998
## 28.047
## 30.963
## 31.426
## 60.803
## CNN
## 23.284
## 34.055
## 53.341
## 64.353
## 1.304
## 1.911
## 2.986
## 3.698
## 31.049
## 45.085
## 65.778
## 81.940
CNN-BiLSTM
## 30.395
## 68.590
## 68.621
## 66.562
## 1.711
## 3.980
## 4.014
## 3.836
## 36.972
## 79.667
## 85.067
## 77.196
CNN-BiGRU
## 24.445
## 36.158
## 46.481
## 42.364
## 1.372
## 2.051
## 2.674
## 2.314
## 31.479
## 47.926
## 58.035
## 53.647
## TCN
## 15.557
## 17.209
## 27.856
## 19.894
## 0.87
## 0.965
## 1.57
## 1.116
## 20.831
## 22.58
## 33.726
## 24.817
TCN-BiLSTM
## 35.674
## 96.560
## 81.277
## 59.714
## 2.008
## 5.657
## 4.692
## 3.398
## 43.678
## 112.973
## 94.097
## 39.860
TCN-BiGRU
## 42.830
## 78.336
## 66.335
## 55.971
## 2.420
## 4.549
## 3.833
## 3.198
## 51.533
## 93.987
## 81.011
## 42.960
## Random Forest
## 96.265
## 73.143
## 156.52
## 73.434
## 5.613
## 4.1920
## 9.4799
## 4.2087
## 121.328
## 97.421
## 177.28
## 97.525
LightGBM
## 43.407
## 69.40
## 70.274
## 79.67
## 2.432
## 3.968
## 4.016
## 4.584
## 64.392
## 94.058
## 95.052
## 104.554
## SVR
## 87.021
## 49.64
## 69.895
## 48.114
## 5.073
## 2.828
## 4.011
## 2.759
## 92.059
## 60.121
## 80.39
## 63.037
## KNN
## 45.454
## 96.477
## 109.76
## 135.61
## 2.553
## 5.621
## 6.450
## 8.099
## 65.257
## 116.41
## 131.78
## 156.72

Page 30 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
exhibit strong generalization capabilities when predicting the gold price during the test
data  period.  Despite  its  success  in  other  forecasting  tasks,  the  LightGBM  model  failed
to  provide  accurate  and  reliable  predictions  for  gold  prices,  indicating  that  the  under
## -
lying  dynamics  and  patterns  of  gold  price  data  might  differ  significantly  from  those  of
WTI and Brent. Table 8 shows the coefficient of variation for the resulting MAEs of all
forecasting models. The coefficient of variation is a scaleless value calculated by dividing
the SD of the model MAEs through various input sequence lengths by the mean of those
MAEs. The forecasting results of the gold market with the results of the WTI and Brent
crude  oil  markets  from  Table 8  show  that  the  models  are  more  sensitive  to  the  input
sequence lengths of the gold market as the MAE forecasting error of each model varies
markedly across the sequence lengths.
Figure 10  depicts  the  RMSE  of  our  forecasting  models  to  predict  the  next-day  gold
price  in  the  test  dataset.  The  recurrent-type  models,  such  as  LSTM,  GRU,  BiLSTM,
BiGRU, T2V-BiLSTM, and T2V-BiGRU, generally have lower RMSE values compared to
the CNN and hybrid models, such as CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-BiGRU, TCN-BiLSTM, and
TCN-BiGRU. This result aligns with the research conducted by He et al. (2019) on gold
price prediction, which demonstrated that a hybrid CNN–LSTM model did not exhibit
superior performance compared with individual CNN or LSTM models.
A  shorter  input  sequence  of  5-day  price  data  is  more  useful  in  gold  price  predic
## -
tions  with  deep-  and  machine-learning  models.  The  gold  price  forecasting  perfor-
mance  generally  deteriorates  by  increasing  the  input  sequence  length.  The  best
prediction  performance  across  all  models  and  sequences  was  achieved  through  the
BiGRU  model  using  30  days  of  gold  price  data.  Based  on  the  findings  presented  in
Table 8,  it  is  evident  that  LightGBM  exhibits  a  higher  coefficient  of  variation  for
MAE  in  Gold  price  forecasting  than  WTI  and  Brent  crude  oil.  This  outcome  indi
## -
cates  that  LightGBM  is  considerably  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  input  sequence
length  when  predicting  the  gold  price.  The  higher  coefficient  of  variation  indicates
that the performance of LightGBM may vary significantly when the input sequence
length  changes,  underscoring  the  need  for  careful  consideration  and  optimization
of the input sequence length specifically for gold price forecasting with LightGBM.
Figure 11 compares the line chart of predicted gold prices in the test dataset with the
## 0
## 20
## 40
## 60
## 80
## 100
## 120
## 140
## 160
## 180
Root Mean Square Error (Gold)
## RMSE-5
## RMSE-30
## RMSE-60
## RMSE-90
Fig. 10 RMSE of Gold next-day price forecasting models

Page 31 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

actual gold price values from 2020-01-03 to 2022-03-25. These results indicate that
the  random  forest  and  LightGBM  models  do  not  generalize  well  in  gold  price  fore
## -
casting.  Comparing  the  performance  of  LightGBM  and  KNN  models  in  predicting
gold  prices,  our  results  demonstrate  the  superiority  of  LightGBM,  which  supports
the study by Yuan (2023).
Silver price forecasting
As a precious metal, the daily spot price of silver is forecasted through the deep-learning
models in this study and compared with the random forest, LightGBM, SVR, and KNN
forecasts.  Table 7  shows  the  MAE,  MAPE,  and  RMSE  of  silver  price  predictions.  The
TCN  model  is  the  best-performing  model  across  all  input  sequence  lengths  to  forecast
the  daily  silver  price,  as  it  scores  the  lowest  MAE,  MAPE,  and  RMSE  among  all  mod
## -
els. Besides the TCN’s superior ability to forecast the silver price, this model is the least
susceptible  to  the  input  sequence  length,  as  shown  by  the  MAE  coefficient  of  variation
in Table 8. The coefficient of MAE variation across all sequence lengths is 0.015 for the
TCN model, the lowest among all models. The results of this study indicate that, except
for the TCN-BiLSTM and TCN-BiGRU models with an input sequence of five days, our
deep-learning models are superior to the SVR and KNN models in predicting the price
of silver. For silver price forecasting, providing bidirectional information seems promis
## -
ing with the BiLSTM model as it reached lower MAE, MAPE, and RMSE values than the
unidirectional LSTM; however, bidirectional information did not improve the forecast
## -
ing performance of the GRU model for silver price prediction. Furthermore, the results
from Table 7 indicate that GRU-type models have a relatively better forecasting perfor
## -
mance than LSTM-type models for silver price prediction.
Using the ensemble (random forest and LightGBM) or conventional (SVR and KNN)
machine-learning  models,  only  LightGBM  outperformed  some  of  the  deep-learning
models,  namely  CNN,  CNN-BiLSTM,  CNN-BiGRU,  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU,
in  silver  price  forecasting.  LightGBM  was  the  best  machine-learning  model  for  silver
price forecasting across all sequence lengths.
Comparing  the  MAE  coefficient  of  variations  between  the  silver  and  gold  markets  in
Table 8 shows that the performance of our forecasting models is relatively less affected
Fig. 11 Comparison of Gold price forecasting models on the test dataset

Page 32 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
by changes in the input sequence length when predicting the silver market. This finding
indicates  that  the  forecasting  models  exhibit  greater  stability  and  consistency  in  their
predictions  for  the  silver  market,  regardless  of  variations  in  the  input  sequence  length.
Table 7 Silver price forecasting performance
To assure the robustness of models’ performances, the average of errors in ten runs of the models are reported here. Bold
indicates the lowest value
ModelsMAEMAPERMSE
## 530609053060905306090
## LSTM0.4900.4630.4970.4912.1862.0862.2392.2210.7210.6940.7410.710
## GRU 0.4400.3940.3810.3851.9671.7531.6671.6840.6580.5900.5490.556
BiLSTM0.4710.3870.4990.4762.0951.7162.2372.1370.7020.5750.7330.710
BiGRU 0.4250.4420.3880.3641.8971.9731.7211.6090.6390.6490.5710.543
T2V-BiLSTM0.4780.5890.4910.4342.1382.6662.2061.9330.7170.8500.7300.653
T2V-BiGRU 0.4720.5480.4620.3702.1252.4832.0651.6410.7030.7940.6790.553
## CNN0.5510.7300.7520.7682.4543.2733.4003.4680.7861.0301.0901.140
CNN-BiLSTM0.5710.7470.6700.7752.5383.3073.0223.4780.8001.1030.9801.108
CNN-BiGRU 0.5280.6110.6560.6352.3582.7372.9522.8430.7790.9260.9530.893
## TCN0.3550.3490.3460.3571.5731.5471.5251.5750.5290.5200.5130.525
TCN-BiLSTM0.6470.9420.7460.6032.8814.2693.3452.6680.9601.3271.0130.867
TCN-BiGRU 0.7140.9280.5530.4673.1864.1552.4762.0861.0581.3070.7800.651
## Random Forest1.8310.8310.8482.4768.0763.5623.64611.302.1491.0591.0752.764
LightGBM0.5090.4750.4860.4752.1542.0472.0702.0610.7100.6650.6840.646
## SVR0.6021.1641.0771.1302.6565.0064.6095.0340.7751.3211.3591.513
## KNN0.6671.1701.8472.6862.8055.0788.02211.470.9131.5012.2953.300
Table 8 coefficient of variation (CoV ) for the MAE of forecasting models
H0: the mean CoV of Gold and Silver markets are equal (p-value = 0.0074)
H0: the mean CoV of WTI and Brent markets are equal (p-value = 0.7142)
The coefficient of variation is calculated by
standarddeviation
## (
## MAE
i
## )
mean
## (
## MAE
i
## )
## ,
i=s
## 5
## ,s
## 30
## ,s
## 60
## ,s
## 90
. Models with values in bold are least
sensitive to the input sequence lengths for each market’s price predictions. Bold indicates the lowest value
WTIBrentGoldSilver
## LSTM0.0200.0160.1240.031
## GRU 0.0610.1160.1640.068
BiLSTM0.0670.0560.2160.107
BiGRU 0.0410.0050.2500.087
T2V-BiLSTM0.1370.1480.1530.131
T2V-BiGRU 0.1080.1140.2480.158
## CNN0.2740.5770.4230.144
CNN-BiLSTM0.2600.1580.3210.132
CNN-BiGRU 0.1820.1300.2570.092
## TCN0.0200.0200.2710.015
TCN-BiLSTM0.1620.1430.3880.205
TCN-BiGRU 0.0810.1790.2480.305
## Random Forest0.2580.1210.3410.465
LightGBM0.0190.0270.2010.028
## SVR0.3010.3010.2510.229
## KNN0.4290.4520.3390.476

Page 33 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

Unlike the gold market, where the models show higher sensitivity to changes in the input
sequence length, the silver market demonstrates a more robust and reliable forecasting
performance across different input sequence lengths.
Figure 12 presents the RMSE of our deep-learning models to forecast the silver next-
day  price  in  the  test  dataset.  Similar  to  the  results  of  the  WTI,  Brent,  and  gold  mar
## -
kets, the silver price forecasting error of the recurrent-type models such as LSTM, GRU,
BiLSTM, BiGRU, T2V-BiLSTM, and T2V-BiGRU are generally lower than the forecast
## -
ing  error  of  the  CNN  and  hybrid  models  such  as  CNN-BiLSTM,  CNN-BiGRU,  TCN-
BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU.  The  best-performing  model  for  predicting  the  silver  price
is the TCN model, which demonstrates robust forecasting performance across all input
sequence  lengths.  Our  results  show  that  the  recurrent-type  models  generally  perform
better  with  a  longer  input  sequence  of  90  days  to  predict  the  next-day  silver  price.  The
best  prediction  performance  across  all  models  and  sequences  is  achieved  through  the
TCN model using 60 days of past silver price data. Moreover, in hybrid models such as
CNN-BiLSTM,  CNN-BiGRU,  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU,  the  TCN  module  per
## -
forms better than the CNN module in extracting the temporal features of the silver mar-
ket price.
Figure 13  illustrates  the  line  chart  of  the  best-predicted  silver  prices  in  the  test  data
## -
set with the actual silver price values from 2020-01-03 to 2022-03-25, showing that the
TCN and random forest models are the best and least generalizing models in silver price
forecasting.
Using MAPE as the metric, our silver price prediction results surpass those of a Gono
et  al.  (2023),  which  employed  random  forest  and  XGBoost  methods.  Our  best  MAPE
for  silver  price  prediction,  1.52%,  significantly  outperforms  the  best  MAPE  of  5.98%
achieved by Gono et al. (2023).
Our significant empirical findings can be summarized as follows.
- TCN is the best model for generalizing and forecasting commodity market prices.
-  LightGBM  is  the  best  machine-learning  model  for  forecasting  commodity  market
prices; however, compared with the TCN model, it performs poorly in capturing and
responding to sharp market dynamics.
## 0
## 0.5
## 1
## 1.5
## 2
## 2.5
## 3
## 3.5
Root Mean Square Error (Silver
## )
## RMSE-5
## RMSE-30
## RMSE-60
## RMSE-90
Fig. 12 RMSE of Silver next-day price forecasting models

Page 34 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
-  GRU-type  models  are  the  best  recurrent-type  deep-learning  models  in  commodity
price forecasting.
- CNN-type models perform poorly in forecasting commodity market prices.
-  The  TCN  and  LightGBM  models  are  the  most  robust  to  input  sequence  lengths  in
predicting commodity market prices.
-  Using  bidirectional  models  improves  commodity  price  forecasting  compared  to
only  information  from  the  forward  price  direction.  This  finding  is  also  supported
by Siami-Namini et al. (2019), indicating that BiLSTM-based modeling yields better
predictions than regular LSTM-based models.
-  To  achieve  superior  forecasting  performance,  it  is  essential  to  consider  the  proper
input sequence length for each deep- or machine-learning model.
-  Among  WTI,  Brent,  gold,  and  silver,  gold  is  the  most  sensible  market  for  the  input
sequence length in price forecasting.
- Time2Vector embedding improves forecasting performance only when using longer
input sequences.
Our findings provide valuable insights for analysts seeking to improve the accuracy of
commodity market price forecasts. By examining the performance of various forecasting
models and considering the impact of input sequence length on their predictive capabili
## -
ties, our study offers guidance for selecting the most suitable models and input param-
eters  for  forecasting  commodity  market  prices.  With  this  knowledge,  governments,
energy sector managers, crude oil and precious metals investors can make sensible deci
## -
sions.  In  a  governmental  context,  crude  oil  and  precious  metal  price  forecasting  helps
governments in fiscal planning, economic policy decisions, resource allocation, revenue
management,  international  trade  negotiations,  socioeconomic  development,  environ
## -
mental policies, and geopolitical considerations. Accurate forecasts enable governments
to  make  informed  decisions  that  impact  the  national  economy,  public  finances,  and
sustainable  development.  Accurate  crude  oil  price  forecasting  gives  managers  valuable
insights to optimize operations, manage risks, allocate budgets and resources efficiently,
and  make  strategic  decisions  in  the  dynamic  energy  market.  They  can  use  forecasted
prices  to  hedge  against  potential  price  fluctuations,  secure  favorable  contracts,  and
Fig. 13 Comparison of Silver price forecasting models on the test dataset

Page 35 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

manage  exposure  to  market  volatility.  Accurate  crude  oil  price  forecasting  can  provide
a competitive advantage by enabling managers to make timely and informed decisions.
They can anticipate market trends, respond quickly to price fluctuations, and stay ahead
of competitors regarding pricing, supply chain management, and customer satisfaction.
## Conclusion
Crude  oil,  particularly  WTI  and  Brent,  is  crucial  in  global  financial  markets  and  eco-
nomics.  In  recent  years,  crude  oil  prices  have  become  more  vulnerable  to  geopolitical
and  macroeconomic  factors.  Thus,  understanding  the  dynamics  of  crude  oil  markets  is
inevitable.  Furthermore,  precious  metals  such  as  gold  and  silver  are  key  commodities
mined in particular countries, which makes the economies of these countries highly reli
## -
ant  on  precious  metal  markets.  Moreover,  gold  is  a  substitute  asset  for  stock  markets
and  is  indispensable  in  financial  investment  portfolios.  Therefore,  developing  an  accu
## -
rate forecasting model for crude oil, gold, and silver price movements is vital for policy-
makers,  business  owners,  investors,  and  other  stakeholders  to  mobilize  timely  political
movements,  foresee  market  trends,  and  properly  design  investment  strategies  to  mit
## -
igate  investment  risks.  In  this  study,  we  implement  12  deep-learning  models,  namely,
LSTM, BiLSTM, GRU, BiGRU, T2V-BiLSTM, T2V-BiGRU, CNN, CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-
BiGRU,  TCN,  TCN-BiLSTM,  and  TCN-BiGRU,  to  forecast  the  WTI,  Brent,  gold,  and
silver market prices and compare their forecasting performance with four baseline mod
## -
els,  namely,  random  forest,  LightGBM,  SVR,  and  KNN  models.  We  use  each  market’s
historical price information for this and apply four different sliding window lengths of 5,
30, 60, and 90 days. MAE, MAPE, and RMSE evaluation metrics are employed to assess
the forecasting power of each model. We compared the forecasting performance of these
models across various input sequence lengths and found that the TCN model is the best-
performing model for forecasting the prices of WTI, Brent, gold, and silver. LightGBM
exhibits comparable forecasting performance to the TCN model in accurately predicting
WTI and Brent crude oil prices. Our results also indicate that the BiGRU and GRU mod
## -
els are the best for predicting gold spot prices with input sequences of 30 and 60, respec-
tively. The best forecasting performance for each market is WTI through a TCN model
with input sequence 60, MAPE 3.53%, Brent through a TCN model with input sequence
5,  MAPE  2.64%,  gold  through  a  BiGRU  model  with  input  sequence  30,  MAPE  0.85%,
and silver through a TCN model with input sequence 60, MAPE 1.53%. Eventually, our
study indicates using the TCN model for superior financial time-series price predictions.
From the empirical results, we determine that the bidirectional LSTM and GRU models
outperform  the  unidirectional  LSTM  and  GRU  models,  respectively.  Moreover,  GRU-
type models such as GRU, BiGRU, T2V-BiGRU, CNN-BiGRU, and TCN-BiGRU outper
## -
formed their LSTM-type peers in predicting WTI, Brent, gold, and silver prices.
Our  study  has  several  implications  for  policymakers  and  investors.  First,  the  results
of  this  study  can  assist  investors  and  decision  makers  in  promptly  anticipating  crude
oil,  gold,  and  silver  market  prices  and  adjusting  their  investment  portfolios.  Addition
## -
ally,  stakeholders  can  execute  risk-hedging  methods  and  lower  their  losses  with  timely
predictions.  In  particular,  gold  is  considered  a  suitable  safe-haven  asset  for  the  stock
and  cryptocurrency  markets  (Junttila  et  al.  2018).  Therefore,  timely  prediction  of  the
gold  market  price  will  help  stock  market  investors  hedge  their  portfolios.  Regarding

Page 36 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
organizational-level and country-level relationships, organizations such as the Organiza-
tion of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, World Petroleum Council, and International
Energy  Agency  and  government  agencies  can  further  apply  the  indicated  method,  for
example, the TCN model, to devise profitable policies related to global crude oil prices.
Finally, our study would be particularly valuable for forecasting crude oil, gold, and silver
prices in case of extreme events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the recent conflict
between Russia and Ukraine, which were covered in the period considered in this study.
Several limitations must be acknowledged in our research on forecasting crude oil and
precious metal prices. First, these markets’ volatile and nonlinear nature poses difficul
## -
ties in capturing all the intricate patterns and sudden price changes. Additionally, exter-
nal factors such as natural disasters, geopolitical events, and supply–demand dynamics
can significantly influence commodity prices and accurately incorporating these factors
into  forecasting  models  remains  a  complex  task.  Finally,  it  is  essential  to  acknowledge
the  inherent  uncertainty  in  forecasting  and  implement  appropriate  risk  management
strategies. Addressing these limitations will enhance the robustness and reliability of our
research findings.
Some possible directions for improving crude oil and precious metals price forecasting
exist.  First,  rather  than  using  only  historical  price  data,  other  features  such  as  techni
## -
cal  indicators,  macroeconomic  features,  supply  and  demand  data,  production  rate,  and
interconnections with other financial markets can be used to predict crude oil and pre
## -
cious  metal  prices.  Second,  incorporating  the  stakeholders’  sentiments,  which  can  be
derived  from  news  articles  and  social  media  platforms,  might  improve  the  forecasting
performance  of  our  proposed  method.  Finally,  an  alternative  to  using  sequential  data,
other  data  structures,  and  learning  methods,  such  as  temporal  graph  neural  networks,
can be implemented to forecast price time-series data.
## Abbreviations
ARDL  Autoregressive distributed lag
ARIMA  Autoregressive integrated moving average
BiGRU   Bidirectional gated recurrent units
BiLSTM  Bidirectional long short-term memory
CNN  Convolutional neural networks
CNN-BiGRU   Convolutional neural networks-bidirectional gated recurrent units
CNN-BiLSTM  Convolutional neural networks-bidirectional long short-term memory
CPI  Consumer price index
DBN  Deep belief network
EMD  Empirical mode decomposition
EEMD-TCN  Empirical mode decomposition-temporal convolutional network
ELM  Extreme learning machines
ENSO  El Niño-Southern oscillation
FNN  Feed-forward neural network
GRU   Gated  recurrent  units
IEA  International energy agency
ISBM  Improved slope-based method
KNN                                          k-Nearest neighbors
LDA  Latent Dirichlet allocation
LSTM  Long short-term memory
MAE  Mean absolute error
MAPE  Mean absolute percentage error
MEMD  Multivariate empirical mode decomposition
MIDAS  Mixed data sampling
MRN  Multi-recurrent  network
NLP  Natural language processing
OPEC  Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
RMSE  Root mean squared error

Page 37 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

RNN  Recurrent neural networks
SDAE  Stacked denoising autoencoders
SVM  Support vector machines
SVR  Support vector regression
T2V  Time2Vector
T2V-BiGRU   Time2Vector bidirectional gated recurrent units
T2V-BiLSTM  Time2Vector bidirectional long short-term memory
TCN  Temporal convolutional networks
TCN-BiGRU   Temporal convolutional networks-bidirectional gated recurrent units
TCN-BiLSTM  Temporal convolutional networks-bidirectional long short-term memory
US  United  States
VAR  Vector  autoregressive
VTFM  Vector trend forecasting method
WOA  Whale optimization algorithm
WPC  World petroleum council
WTI  West  Texas  intermediate
## Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Author contributions
PF: Conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing original
draft, writing review and editing. SL: Conceptualization, methodology, and review. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
## Funding
Not applicable.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
## Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
## Received: 17 January 2023   Accepted: 7 February 2024
## References
Abdullah Ahmed R, Bin Shabri A (2014) Daily crude oil price forecasting model using Arima, generalized autoregressive
conditional heteroscedastic and support vector machines. Am J Appl Sci 11(3):425–432
Adekoya OB, Akinseye AB, Antonakakis N, Chatziantoniou I, Gabauer D, Oliyide J (2022) Crude oil and Islamic sectoral
stocks: Asymmetric TVP-VAR connectedness and investment strategies. Resour Policy 78:102877
Akbar M, Iqbal F, Noor F (2019) Bayesian analysis of dynamic linkages among gold price, stock prices, exchange rate and
interest rate in Pakistan. Resour Policy 62:154–164
Alameer Z, Elaziz MA, Ewees AA, Ye H, Jianhua Z (2019) Forecasting gold price fluctuations using improved multilayer
perceptron neural network and whale optimization algorithm. Resour Policy 61:250–260
Almeida F, Xexéo G (2019) Word embeddings: a survey
Amirifar T, Lahmiri S, Zanjani MK (2023) An NLP-deep learning approach for product rating prediction based on online
reviews and product features. IEEE Trans Comput Soc Syst. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TCSS. 2023. 32905 58
Amirshahi B, Lahmiri S (2023a) Hybrid deep learning and GARCH-family models for forecasting volatility of cryptocurren-
cies. Mach Learn Appl 12:100465
Amirshahi B, Lahmiri S (2023b) Investigating the effectiveness of Twitter sentiment in cryptocurrency close price predic-
tion by using deep learning. Expert Syst. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ exsy. 13428
Arbane M, Benlamri R, Brik Y, Alahmar AD (2023) Social media-based COVID-19 sentiment classification model using Bi-
LSTM. Expert Syst Appl 212:118710
Baek C (2019) How are gold returns related to stock or bond returns in the U.S. market? Evidence from the past 10-year
gold market. Appl Econ 51(50):5490–5497
Bai Y, Li X, Yu H, Jia S (2022) Crude oil price forecasting incorporating news text. Int J Forecast 38(1):367–383
Balcilar M, Gabauer D, Umar Z (2021) Crude Oil futures contracts and commodity markets: new evidence from a TVP-VAR
extended joint connectedness approach. Resour Policy 73:102219
ben Khelifa S, Guesmi K, Urom C (2021) Exploring the relationship between cryptocurrencies and hedge funds during
COVID-19 crisis. Int Rev Financ Anal 76:101777
Bhowmik R, Wang S (2020) Stock market volatility and return analysis: a systematic literature review. Entropy 22(5):522

Page 38 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
Boongasame L, Viriyaphol P, Tassanavipas K, Temdee P (2022) Gold-price forecasting method using long short-term
memory and the association rule. J Mob Multimedia 19(1):165–186
Borisov V, Leemann T, Seßler K, Haug J, Pawelczyk M, Kasneci G (2021) Deep neural networks and tabular data: a survey.
IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst:1–21
Chen T, Guestrin C (2016) XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting system. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 785–794
Cho K, van Merrienboer B, Bahdanau D, Bengio Y (2014) On the properties of neural machine translation: encoder-
decoder approaches
Chung J, Gulcehre C, Cho K, Bengio Y (2014) Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence
modeling
Das S, Nayak J, Kamesh Rao B, Vakula K, Ranjan Routray A (2022) Gold price forecasting using machine learning tech-
niques: review of a decade. Adv Intell Syst Comput Book Ser (AISC) 1349:679–695
Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K, Google KT, Language, AI (2018) BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding
Drachal K (2022) Forecasting the crude oil spot price with bayesian symbolic regression. Energies 16(1):4
Enwereuzoh PA, Odei-Mensah J, Owusu Junior P (2021) Crude oil shocks and African stock markets. Res Int Bus Financ
## 55:101346
Fang T, Zheng C, Wang D (2023a) Forecasting the crude oil prices with an EMD-ISBM-FNN model. Energy 263:125407
Fang Y, Wang W, Wu P, Zhao Y (2023b) A sentiment-enhanced hybrid model for crude oil price forecasting. Expert Syst
## Appl 215:119329
Gharghory SM (2021) A hybrid model of bidirectional long-short term memory and CNN for multivariate time series clas-
sification of remote sensing data. J Comput Sci 17(9):789–802
Gono DN, Napitupulu H (2023) Silver price forecasting using extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) method. Mathematics
## 11(18):3813
Gopali S, Abri F, Siami-Namini S, Namin AS (2021) A comparison of TCN and LSTM models in detecting anomalies in time
series data. IEEE Int Conf Big Data 2021:2415–2420
Gruber N, Jockisch A (2020) Are GRU Cells more specific and LSTM Cells more sensitive in motive classification of text?
## Front Artif Intell 3
Guo J, Zhao Z, Sun J, Sun S (2022) Multi-perspective crude oil price forecasting with a new decomposition-ensemble
framework. Resour Policy 77:102737
He P, Liu X, Gao J, Chen W (2020) DeBERTa: decoding-enhanced BERT with Disentangled Attention. International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations
He Z, Zhou J, Dai HN, Wang H (2019) Gold price forecast based on LSTM-CNN model. In: 2019 IEEE international confer-
ence on dependable, autonomic and secure computing, pp 1046–1053
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory. Neural Comput 9(8):1735–1780
Huang Y, Liu Q, Peng H, Wang J, Yang Q, Orellana-Martín D (2023) Sentiment classification using bidirectional LSTM-SNP
model and attention mechanism. Expert Syst Appl 221:119730
Hussain Shahzad SJ, Raza N, Shahbaz M, Ali A (2017) Dependence of stock markets with gold and bonds under bullish
and bearish market states. Resour Policy 52:308–319
Jiang H, Hu W, Xiao L, Dong Y (2022) A decomposition ensemble based deep learning approach for crude oil price
forecasting. Resour Policy 78:102855
Junttila J, Pesonen J, Raatikainen J (2018) Commodity market based hedging against stock market risk in times of finan-
cial crisis: the case of crude oil and gold. J Int Finan Markets Inst Money 56:255–280
Kazemi SM, Goel R, Eghbali S, Ramanan J, Sahota J, Thakur S, Wu S, Smyth C, Poupart P, Brubaker M (2019) Time2Vec:
learning a vector representation of time
Ke G, Meng Q, Finley T, Wang T, Chen W, Ma W, Ye Q, Liu TY (2017) LightGBM: a highly efficient gradient boosting decision
tree. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 30:3146–3154
Kertlly de Medeiros R, da Nóbrega BC, Pitta de Jesus D, Phillipe de Albuquerquemello V (2022) Forecasting oil prices: new
approaches. Energy 238:121968
Khan M, Wang H, Riaz A, Elfatyany A, Karim S (2021) Bidirectional LSTM-RNN-based hybrid deep learning frameworks for
univariate time series classification. J Supercomput 77(7):7021–7045
Kou G, Olgu Akdeniz Ö, Dinçer H, Yüksel S (2021) Fintech investments in European banks: a hybrid IT2 fuzzy multidimen-
sional decision-making approach. Financ Innov 7:39
Kou G, Yüksel S, Dinçer H (2022) Inventive problem-solving map of innovative carbon emission strategies for solar
energy-based transportation investment projects. Appl Energy 311:118680
Lahmiri S (2023a) Multifractals and multiscale entropy patterns in energy markets under the effect of the COVID-19
pandemic. Decis Anal J 7:100247
Lahmiri S (2023b) A comparative study of statistical machine learning methods for condition monitoring of electric drive
trains in supply chains. Supply Chain Anal 2:100011
Lahmiri S, Bekiros S (2019) Cryptocurrency forecasting with deep learning chaotic neural networks. Chaos, Solitons
## Fractals 118:35–40
Lahmiri S, Bekiros S (2020) Intelligent forecasting with machine learning trading systems in chaotic intraday Bitcoin
market. Chaos, Solitons Fractals 133:109641
Lahmiri S, Bekiros S (2021) Deep learning forecasting in cryptocurrency high-frequency trading. Cogn Comput
## 13:485–487
Lahmiri S, Bekiros S, Avdoulas C (2023) A comparative assessment of machine learning methods for predicting housing
prices using Bayesian optimization. Decis Anal J 6:100166
Lahmiri S, Bekiros S, Bezzina B (2022) Complexity analysis and forecasting of variations in cryptocurrency trading volume
with support vector regression tuned by Bayesian optimization under different kernels: an empirical comparison
from a large dataset. Expert Syst Appl 209:118349

Page 39 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111

Lara-Benítez P, Carranza-García M, Luna-Romera JM, Riquelme JC (2020) Temporal convolutional networks applied to
energy-related time series forecasting. Appl Sci 10(7):2322
Lea C, Flynn MD, Vidal R, Reiter A, Hager G.D (2016) Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and
detection
Lecun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, Haffner P (1998) Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proc IEEE
## 86(11):2278–2324
Li G, Yin S, Yang H (2022a) A novel crude oil prices forecasting model based on secondary decomposition. Energy
## 257:124684
Li T, Kou G, Peng Y, Yu PS (2022b) An integrated cluster detection, optimization, and interpretation approach for financial
data. IEEE Trans Cybern 52(12):13848–13861
Li X, Shang W, Wang S (2019) Text-based crude oil price forecasting: a deep learning approach. Int J Forecast
## 35(4):1548–1560
Li Y, Du N, Bengio S (2017) Time-dependent representation for neural event sequence prediction
Liang X, Luo P, Li X, Wang X, Shu L (2023) Crude oil price prediction using deep reinforcement learning. Resour Policy
## 81:103363
Lim B, Zohren S (2021) Time-series forecasting with deep learning: a survey. Philos Trans R Soc Math Phys Eng Sci
## 379(2194):20200209
Lin Y, Chen K, Zhang X, Tan B, Lu Q (2022) Forecasting crude oil futures prices using BiLSTM-Attention-CNN model with
Wavelet transform. Appl Soft Comput 130:109723
Liu G, Guo J (2019) Bidirectional LSTM with attention mechanism and convolutional layer for text classification. Neuro-
computing 337:325–338
Liu Y, Ott M, Goyal N, Du J, Joshi M, Chen D, Levy O, Lewis M, Zettlemoyer L, Stoyanov V (2019) RoBERTa: a robustly opti-
mized BERT pretraining approach
Lu W, Li J, Li Y, Sun A, Wang J (2020) A CNN-LSTM-based model to forecast stock prices. Complexity 2020:1–10
Madziwa L, Pillalamarry M, Chatterjee S (2022) Gold price forecasting using multivariate stochastic model. Resour Policy
## 76:102544
Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, Corrado G, Dean J (2013) Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality
Mohamed NA, Messaadia M (2023) Artificial intelligence techniques for the forecasting of crude oil price: a literature
review. In: International conference on cyber management and engineering (CyMaEn), pp 340–343
Murshed M, Tanha MM (2021) Oil price shocks and renewable energy transition: empirical evidence from net oil-import-
ing South Asian economies. Energy Ecol Environ 6(3):183–203
Orojo O, Tepper J, McGinnity TM, Mahmud M (2019) A multi-recurrent network for crude oil price prediction. In: IEEE
symposium series on computational intelligence (SSCI)
Pennington J, Socher R, Manning C (2014) Glove: global vectors for word representation. In: Proceedings of the 2014
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), pp 1532–1543
Periwal A (2023) The impact of crude oil price fluctuations on Indian economy. Int J Res Appl Sci Eng Technol
## 11(4):3173–3202
Phan DHB, Sharma SS, Narayan PK (2016) Intraday volatility interaction between the crude oil and equity markets. J Int
## Finan Markets Inst Money 40:1–13
Prokhorenkova L, Gusev G, Vorobev A, Dorogush AV, Gulin A (2018) CatBoost: unbiased boosting with categorical fea-
tures. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 31
Pullen T, Benson K, Faff R (2014) A Comparative analysis of the investment characteristics of alternative gold assets.
## Abacus 50(1):76–92
Qin Q, Huang Z, Zhou Z, Chen C, Liu R (2023) Crude oil price forecasting with machine learning and Google search data:
an accuracy comparison of single-model versus multiple-model. Eng Appl Artif Intell 123:106266
Qin Q, Xie K, He H, Li L, Chu X, Wei YM, Wu T (2019) An effective and robust decomposition-ensemble energy price fore-
casting paradigm with local linear prediction. Energy Econ 83:402–414
Raza S, Schwartz B (2023) Entity and relation extraction from clinical case reports of COVID-19: a natural language pro-
cessing approach. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 23(1):20
Reboredo JC (2013) Is gold a safe haven or a hedge for the US dollar? Implications for risk management. J Bank Finance
## 37(8):2665–2676
Risse M (2019) Combining wavelet decomposition with machine learning to forecast gold returns. Int J Forecast
## 35(2):601–615
Salisu AA, Ogbonna AE, Adewuyi A (2020) Google trends and the predictability of precious metals. Resour Policy 65
Sarwar S, Shahbaz M, Anwar A, Tiwari AK (2019) The importance of oil assets for portfolio optimization: the analysis of
firm level stocks. Energy Econ 78:217–234
Siami-Namini S, Tavakoli N, Namin AS (2019) The Performance of LSTM and BiLSTM in forecasting time series. IEEE Int
## Conf Big Data 2019:3285–3292
Sroka Ł (2022) Applying block bootstrap methods in silver prices forecasting. Econometrics 26(2):15–29
Su M, Liu H, Yu C, Duan Z (2022) A new crude oil futures forecasting method based on fusing quadratic forecasting with
residual forecasting. Digital Signal Process 130:103691
Sun J, Zhao P, Sun S (2022) A new secondary decomposition-reconstruction-ensemble approach for crude oil price
forecasting. Resour Policy 77:102762
Swamy V, Lagesh MA (2023) Does happy Twitter forecast gold price? Resour Policy 81:103299
Szarek D, Bielak Ł, Wyłomańska A (2020) Long-term prediction of the metals’ prices using non-Gaussian time-inhomoge-
neous stochastic process. Phys A Stat Mech Appl 555
Tang L, Zhang C, Li L, Wang S (2020) A multi-scale method for forecasting oil price with multi-factor search engine data.
## Appl Energy 257:114033
Uzo-Peters A, Laniran T, Adenikinju A (2018) Brent prices and oil stock behaviors: evidence from Nigerian listed oil stocks.
## Financ Innov 4(1):8

Page 40 of 40
Foroutan and Lahmiri  Financial Innovation          (2024) 10:111
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser L, Polosukhin I (2017) Attention is all you need
Vidal A, Kristjanpoller W (2020) Gold volatility prediction using a CNN-LSTM approach. Expert Syst Appl 157(1348):1
Wang J, Athanasopoulos G, Hyndman RJ, Wang S (2018) Crude oil price forecasting based on internet concern using an
extreme learning machine. Int J Forecast 34(4):665–677
Wang J, Niu T, Du P, Yang W (2020) Ensemble probabilistic prediction approach for modeling uncertainty in crude oil
price. Appl Soft Comput J 95:106509
Wang L, Ma F, Niu T, Liang C (2021) The importance of extreme shock: examining the effect of investor sentiment on the
crude oil futures market. Energy Econ 99:105319
Xiuzhen X, Zheng W, Umair M (2022) Testing the fluctuations of oil resource price volatility: a hurdle for economic recov-
ery. SSRN Electron J
Xu D, Ruan C, Korpeoglu E, Kumar S, Achan K (2021) A Temporal kernel approach for deep learning with continuous-time
information
Xu D, Ruan C, Kumar S, Korpeoglu E, Achan K (2019) Self-attention with functional time representation learning
Yan J, Mu L, Wang L, Ranjan R, Zomaya AY (2020) Temporal convolutional networks for the advance prediction of ENSO.
## Sci Rep 10(1):8055
Yang M, Li X, Liu Y (2021) Sequence to point learning based on an attention neural network for nonintrusive load decom-
position. Electronics 10(14):1657
Yang M, Wang J (2022) Adaptability of financial time series prediction based on BiLSTM. Procedia Comput Sci 199:18–25
Yang S, Chen D, Li S, Wang W (2020) Carbon price forecasting based on modified ensemble empirical mode decom-
position and long short-term memory optimized by improved whale optimization algorithm. Sci Total Environ
## 716:137117
Yu Y, Si X, Hu C, Zhang J (2019) A review of recurrent neural networks: LSTM cells and network architectures. Neural
## Comput 31(7):1235–1270
Yuan Z (2023) Gold and bitcoin price prediction based on KNN, XGBoost and LightGBM model. Highlights Sci Eng
## Technol 39:720–725
Zhang P, Ci B (2020) Deep belief network for gold price forecasting. Resour Policy 69:101806
Zhang S, Chen Y, Zhang W, Feng R (2021) A novel ensemble deep learning model with dynamic error correction and
multi-objective ensemble pruning for time series forecasting. Inf Sci 544:427–445
Zhang Y, Wang J, Yu L, Wang S (2022a) An extreme bias-penalized forecast combination approach to commodity price
forecasting. Inf Sci 615:774–793
Zhang Z, He M, Zhang Y, Wang Y (2022b) Geopolitical risk trends and crude oil price predictability. Energy 258:124824
Zhao L, Cheng L, Wan Y, Zhang H, Zhang Z (2015) A VAR-SVM model for crude oil price forecasting. Int J Glob Energy
## Issues 38(1/2/3):126
Zhao LT, Wang Y, Guo SQ, Zeng GR (2018) A novel method based on numerical fitting for oil price trend forecasting. Appl
## Energy 220:154–163
Zhao Y, Li J, Yu L (2017) A deep learning ensemble approach for crude oil price forecasting. Energy Econ 66:9–16
Zhou S, Wu JN, Wu Y, Zhou X (2015) Exploiting local structures with the kronecker layer in convolutional networks
## Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.